Preface 


‘Ninety per cent of diagnoses are made from 
the history. ’ 

‘Clinical examination is the cornerstone of 
assessment.' 

These, or similar platitudes, will be familiar to 
most students in clinical training. Many, however, 
notice a ‘disconnect’ between the importance 
ascribed to basic clinical skills during teaching 
and the apparent reliance on sophisticated inves¬ 
tigations in the parallel world of clinical practice. 
Modern diagnostics have radically altered the 
face of medical practice; clinical training is still 
catching up. We recognize that teachers and 
textbooks frequently fall into the trap of eulogizing 
clinical assessment rather than explaining its 
actual role in contemporary diagnosis. 

Yet we come to praise the clinical assessment, 
not to bury it The history may not, by itself, 
deliver the diagnosis in 90% of cases but it 
is essential in all cases to generate a logical 
differential diagnosis and to guide rational 
investigation and treatment. In many ‘developed’ 
countries, some so-called classical physica 
signs are rare and certain aspects of the clinical 


examination have been marginalized by novel 
imaging techniques and disease biomarkers. 
Nevertheless, a focused clinical examination is 
critical to recognizing the sick patient, raising 
red flags identifying unsuspected problems and, 
in some cases, revealing signs that cannot be 
identified with tests (for example, the mental 
state examination). 

Our aim is to show you how to use your core 
clinical skills to maximum advantage. We offer 
a grounded and realistic approach to clinical 
diagnosis with no bias towards any particular 
element of the assessment. Where appropriate, 
we acknowledge the limitations of the history 
and examination and direct you to the necessary 
investigation. We also highlight those instances 
where diagnosis is critically dependent on basic 
clinical assessment, thereby demonstrating its 
vital and enduring importance. We wish you 
every success in your training and practice, and 
hope that this book provides at least some small 
measure of assistance. 

Alan Japp 
Colin Robertson 
Edinburgh, 2018 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


Acknowledgements 


On behalf of the editors and authors, I would 
like to thank Laurence Hunter for encouraging 
and facilitating this new edition; and Helen Leng 
for once again providing the perfect blend of 
tolerance, support and discipline. We also thank 
everyone who volunteered suggestions and 
ideas for the 2nd edition, particularly Dr Vicky 
Tallen ire, Dr Michael MacMahon and Dr Dean 
Kerslake. Finally we gratefully acknowledge a 
valuable contribution to individual chapters from 
Dr Mark Wright, Consultant Ophthalmologist, 


Edinburgh (Chapter 28, Red eye); Dr Lydia Ash, 
Specialty Registrar, Obstetrics & Gynaecology, 
Edinburgh (Chapter 33, Vaginal bleeding), Mr 
Andrew Duckworth, Specialty Registrar, Ortho¬ 
paedic Surgery, Edinburgh (Chapter 20, Joint 
swelling) and Mr Neil Maitra, Locum Consultant 
Urologist, Lanarkshire (Chapter 1 6, Haematuria) 
and everyone else who has volunteered ideas, 
comments, assistance or a friendly ear. 

AJ 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


Abbreviations 


Abbreviations that do not appear in this list are spelled out in the main text. 


ABODE 

airway, breathing, circulation, 

DMARD 

disease-modifying anti-rheumatic 


disability exposure 


drug 

ABG 

arterial blood gas 

ECG 

electrocardiogram/ 

ACE 

angiotensin-converting enzyme 


electrocardiography 

AC PA 

anti-citrullinated protein antibody 

EEG 

electroencephalogram/ 

ACTH 

adrenocorticotrophic hormone 


electroencephalography 

AIDS 

acquired immunodeficiency 

ENA 

extractable nuclear antigen 


syndrome 

ENT 

ear, nose and throat 

ALP 

alkaline phosphatase 

ERCP 

endoscopic retrograde 

ALT 

alanine aminotransferase 


cholangiopancreatography 

ANA 

antinuclear antibody 

ESR 

erythrocyte sedimentation rate 

ANCA 

antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody 

FBC 

full blood count 

APTT 

activated partial thromboplastin 

Fi0 2 

fraction of inspired oxygen 


time 

GCS 

Glasgow Coma Scale (score) 

ASMA 

anti-smooth muscle antibody 

GFR 

glomerular filtration rate 

ASO 

anti-streptolysin 0 

GGT 

gamma-glutamyl transferase 

AST 

aspartate aminotransferase 

Gl 

gastrointestinal 

AXR 

abdominal X-ray 

GP 

general practitioner 

BMI 

body mass index 

GU 

genitourinary 

BP 

blood pressure 

Hb 

haemoglobin 

bpm 

beats per minute 

hCG 

human chorionic gonadotrophin 

BS 

breath sound 

HIV 

human immunodeficiency virus 

CBG 

capillary blood glucose 

HR 

heart rate 

CLO 

Campylobacter- like organism 

ICP 

intracranial pressure 

CK 

creatine kinase 

ICU 

intensive care unit 

CKD 

chronic kidney disease 

ID 

infectious disease 

CNS 

central nervous system 

IM 

intramuscular(ly) 

COPD 

chronic obstructive pulmonary 

INR 

international normalized ratio 


disease 

IV 

intravenous(ly) 

CPET 

cardiopulmonary exercise test 

IVU 

intravenous urogram/urography 

CRP 

C-reactive protein 

JVP 

jugular venous pulse 

CRT 

capillary refill time 

LDH 

lactate dehydrogenase 

CSF 

cerebrospinal fluid 

LFT 

liver function test 

CSU 

catheter specimen of urine 

LIF 

left iliac fossa 

CT 

computed tomogram/tomography 

LKM 

liver kidney microsomal 

CTPA 

computed tomographic pulmonary 


(antibodies) 


angiography 

LLQ 

left lower quadrant 

CVP 

central venous pressure 

LP 

lumbar puncture 

CXR 

chest X-ray 

LUQ 

left upper quadrant 

DC 

direct current 

MRA 

magnetic resonance angiography 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


x • ABBREVIATIONS 


MRCP 

magnetic resonance 

RLQ 

right lower quadrant 


cholangiopancreatography 

RR 

respiratory rate 

MRI 

magnetic resonance imaging 

RUQ 

right upper quadrant 

MSU 

midstream urine (specimen) 

Sa0 2 

oxygen saturation of arterial blood 

NSAID 

non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug 

SC 

subcutaneous(ly) 

Pa00 2 

partial pressure of carbon dioxide 

SIRS 

systemic inflammatory response 


in arterial blood 


syndrome 

Pa0 2 

partial pressure of oxygen in arterial 

SLE 

systemic lupus erythematosus 


blood 

Sp0 2 

peripheral (capillary) oxygen 

PCR 

polymerase chain reaction 


saturation 

PEFR 

peak expiratory flow rate 

SSRI 

selective serotonin re-uptake 

PET 

positron emission tomography 


inhibitor 

PFTs 

pulmonary function tests 

SVT 

supraventricular tachycardia 

PR 

per rectum 

TFT 

thyroid function test 

PRN 

pro re nata; whenever required 

TIA 

transient ischaemic attack 

PSA 

prostate-specific antigen 

TNF 

tumour necrosis factor 

PT 

prothrombin time 

TWI 

T wave inversion 

PV 

per vaginam 

U+E 

urea and electrolytes 

qSOFA 

quick Sepsis Related Organ Failure 

UGIE 

upper gastrointestinal endoscopy 


Assessment 

UMN 

upper motor neuron 

QTc 

corrected QT interval 

uss 

ultrasound scan 

RF 

rheumatoid factor 

VT 

ventricular tachycardia 

RIF 

right iliac fossa 

WBC 

white blood count 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


Section 1 

Principles of clinical assessment 


1. What’s in a diagnosis? 3 

2. Assessing patients: a practical guide 7 

3. The diagnostic process 17 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


This page intentionally left blank 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



What’s in a diagnosis? 


From differential diagnosis 
to final diagnosis 

A diagnosis is simply shorthand for a patient’s 
condition or disease process. The ability to 
diagnose accurately is fundamental to clinical 
practice Only with a correct diagnosis, or a 
short-list of possible diagnoses, can you: 

• formulate an appropriate sequence of 
investigations 

• begin correct treatment and assess its 
effectiveness 

• give an informed prognosis and make 
follow-up arrangements. 

Producing a differential diagnosis - a list of 
diagnoses, placed in order of likelihood, which 
may be causing the presentation - is a stepping- 
stone to the final diagnosis. This list may be 
lengthy at the outset of assessment but will 
become progressively shorter as you accumu¬ 
late information about the patient’s condition 
through your history-taking, examination and 
investigations. When one diagnosis begins to 
stand out from the rest as the most likely cause 
of the patient’s presentation, it is often referred 
to as the working diagnosis. Investigations are 
then directed toward confirming (or refuting) this 
condition and thereby arriving at a final diagnosis. 
This entire process may happen very rapidly; for 
example, establishing a final diagnosis of acute 
ST segment elevation myocardial infarction in a 
patient presenting with acute chest pain should 
usually take less than 10 minutes. 

Frequently the identification of an abnormality 
is only the first step in the diagnostic process and 
additional assessment is required to characterize 
a condition in greater detail or search for an 
underlying cause. For example, in a middle-aged 
man presenting with fatigue, you might identify 
anaemia as the cause of his symptoms, but the 
diagnostic process would not stop there. The 


next step would be to establish the cause of 
the anaemia. If subsequent laboratory investiga¬ 
tions revealed evidence of iron deficiency, you 
need to determine the cause. Gastrointestinal 
investigations might uncover a gastric tumour 
but, even then, further assessment would still 
be required to establish a tissue diagnosis and 
stage the tumour. The eventual ‘final diagnosis 
might be of iron-deficiency anaemia secondary to 
blood loss from a T3, N1, Ml gastric carcinoma 
with metastasis to liver and peritoneum. Clearly, 
the diagnosis of ‘anaemia’ would have been 
grossly inadequate. 

Some conditions, especially functional disor¬ 
ders such as irritable bowel syndrome, lack a 
definitive confirmatory test; here diagnosis relies 
upon recognising characteristic clinical features 
and ruling out alternative diagnoses - especially 
serious or life-threatening conditions. Such 
disorders are often referred to as diagnoses of 
exclusion. 


Probability and risk 

Diagnostic tests are inherently imperfect, so 
regard diagnoses as statements of probability 
rather than hard facts. In practice, a disease is 
‘ruled in’ when the probability of it being present 
is deemed to be sufficiently high, and ‘ruled 
out’ when the probability is sufficiently low. 
The degree of ce tainty required depends on 
factors such as the consequences of missing the 
particular diagnosis, the side-effects of treatment 
and the risks of further testing. Doctors must 
not become so ‘paralysed’ by the implications of 
m ssing a diagnosis that they admit the patient 
unnecessarily to hospital and/or investigate to 
levels that are not in the patient’s best inte ests 
and are unacceptable because of time, expense 
and intrinsic risk, e.g. radiation exposure. On 
the other hand, a high threshold of certainty, 
i.e. very low probability, is required to exclude 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 








j^^^WH^^^^IAGNOSIS? 


potentially life-threatening conditions. If the situ¬ 
ation is explained appropriately, most patients 
will accept tests that yield a diagnostic accu¬ 
racy of less than 1 % for acute life-threatening 
conditions. 

The current diagnostic approach to suba¬ 
rachnoid haemorrhage (SAH) illustrates this. 
For a middle-aged patient who presents, fully 
conscious, with a history of sudden (within a few 
seconds) onset of ‘the worst headache ever’, the 
chances of a diagnosis of SAH are approximately 
10-12%. The presence of some clinical findings, 
e.g. photophobia, neck stiffness, cranial nerve 
palsies, subhyaloid haemorrhage - will increase 
these chances markedly but these features may 
take time to develop. Even if clinical examination 
is unequivocally normal, the chances of SAH are 
8-10% Currently, there is no simple bedside test 
for SAH and the initial investigation is normally 
a non-contrast CT scan. A positive scan will 
prompt appropriate treatment, possibly involving 
neurosurgical or neuroradiological intervention. 
A negative scan does not, however, exclude 
an SAH. The accuracy of CT scanning in 
detecting SAH depends upon the experience 
of the reporting individual, the nature of the 
scanner (principally, its resolution) and the time 
interval between the onset of symptoms and 
the scan (accuracy falls with time). A scan 
performed within 12 hours by most modern 
scanners and interpreted by a skilled radiolo¬ 
gist has a diagnostic accuracy of approximately 
98% But, given the morbidity and mortality of 
unrecognized and untreated SAH, even this 
level of diagnostic accuracy is inadequate. 
For this reason, patients with a negative CT 
scan have a lumbar puncture. The CSF obtained 
must be examined by spectrophotometry in 
the laboratory for xanthochromia (direct visual 
inspection of the fluid is insufficiently accurate). 
Xanthochromia (produced from haemoglobin 
breakdown within the CSF) takes some time 
to develop and the sensitivity of this test peaks 
at about 12 hours after symptom onset. The 
combination of a negative CT scan performed 
within 12 hours of symptom onset and normal 
CSF findings at 12 hours reduces the chances 
of the patient’s symptoms being caused by an 
SAH to well below 1 % - a level of probability 
acceptable to most clinicians and, if appropriately 
explained, to their patient. 


Special situations 

Medically unexplained symptoms 

Sometimes it is difficult to correlate patients’ 
symptoms with a specific disease This does not 
mean that the symptoms with which they present 
are factitious or that they are malingering - merely 
that we are unable to provide a physical cause 
for the symptoms. For patients in primary care, 
over 70% have symptoms that cannot be readily 
explained by a specific diagnosis. Nevertheless, 
the symptoms are very real to the patient and 
one of the major challenges, intellectually and 
practically, is to recognize which patients have 
physical disease. 

Clusters of symptoms in recognisable patterns, 
in the absence of physical and investigational 
abnormalities, are called functional syndromes 
(Table 1.1). 

In general, the greater the number of symp¬ 
toms, the greater the likelihood that there is a 
psychological component to the presentation. 
Remember that patients with chronic disease are 
more likely to demonstrate psychological aspects 
of their condition, especially depression, which 
may, in turn, affect the mode of presentation. 
Avoiding excessive and inappropriate investigation 


Table 11 Common functional syndromes 

Syndrome 

Symptoms 

Chronic fatigue 
syndrome 

Persistent fatigue 2 

Irritable bowel 
syndrome 

Abdominal pain, altered bowel 
habit (diarrhoea or constipation) 
and abdominal bloating 

Chronic pain 
syndrome 

Persistent pain in one or more 
parts of the body, sometimes 
following injury but which 
outlasts the original trauma 2 

Fibromyalgia 

Pain in the axial skeleton with 
trigger points (tender areas in 
the muscles ) 2 

Chronic back 
pain 

Pain, muscle tension or stiffness 
localized below the costal margin 
and above the inferior gluteal 
folds, with or without leg pain 2 

'In all cases, physical examination and investigation fail to reveal 
an underlying physical cause. 

2 Symptoms must have lasted more than 3 months. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
















WHAT’S IN A DIAGNOSIS? 


5 



Fig. 1.1 Common symptoms and disease. (From Douglas JG, Nicol F, Robertson C. Macleod's Clinical Examination, 
13th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2013.) 


to ‘exclude’ diagnoses is important, especially if 
patients have no specific ‘red flags’ in relation to 
their history, they are not in a recognized at-risk 
group, and there are no abnormalities on clinical 
examination and simple bedside tests (Fig. 1.1 
and Box 1.1). 

Treatment before diagnosis 

Sometimes, accurate diagnosis depends upon 
the patient’s response to treatment. In a few 


Box 1.1 Symptoms and their relationship to 
physical disease 


More commonly 

• Chest pain 

• Breathlessness 

• Syncope 

• Abdominal pain 

Less commonly 

• Fatigue 

• Back pain 

• Fleadache 

• Dizziness 


specific situations this may be life-saving as 
well as diagnostic. In any patient with altered 
consciousness or acute neurological dysfunction 
without a clearly identifiable cause, two conditions 
need to be excluded and treated immediately. 

Hypoglycaemia can mimic conditions such 
as epilepsy and hemiplegia. Check the CBG. 
If the value is low, take a formal blood sample 
for laboratory blood glucose determination, but 
do not wait for this result before giving treat¬ 
ment - give glucose or glucagon immediately. 
If hypoglycaemia is the cause of the patient’s 
symptoms, response will normally occur within 
5-10 minutes (rarely, in cases where there has 
been severe, prolonged hypoglycaemia, this may 
take longer and residual neurological deficit may 
persist). 

Opioid intoxication is usually associated with 
al ered consciousness, reduced respiratory ra e 
and depth, and small pupils. The diagnosis is 
rarely difficult in younger patients with a history or 
other features of illicit drug use. However, these 
features are not always present, and chronic 
opioid toxicity may develop over hours/days, 
particularly in elderly patients or those with renal 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 














































WHAT’S IN A DIAGNOSIS? 


6 


impairment Naloxone is a highly specific opioid 
antagonist with no agonist activity. Give 0.8 mg 
naloxone (SC, IM or IV) immediately. If there is 
any response, further doses of naloxone will be 
required until no further reversal is achieved. 
Remember that the half-life of naloxone is much 
shorter than that of the opioid that has been 
taken, so repeated stat. doses or an infusion 
are likely to be needed. 

There is one other situation where treatment is 
necessary before, or to achieve, diagnosis. It is 
unnecessary, unhelpful and inhumane to leave a 
patient in pain from whatever cause. Put yourself 
in the patient’s place. There is never any 
indication to withhold analgesia from a patient 
in pain. Concerns that you will ‘mask’ clinical 
signs, e.g. by giving opioids to a patient with 
an ‘acute abdomen, encourage opioid toler¬ 
ance or addiction, and impair informed consent 
are completely unfounded. In fact, diagnostic 
accuracy is improved by making the patient 
more co-operative, aiding the performance of 
investigations such as ultrasound and pain 
relief brings additional benefits in reducing 
catecholamine stimulation, improving respiratory 
and cardiovascular function. The ‘pain ladder’ 
approach is useful, but for patients in acute or 
severe pain, IV opioids titrated to the clinical 
response are usually needed. 

The patient who conies with a diagnosis 

Many patients have an idea of their own condi¬ 
tion and, indeed, may begin the consultation by 
telling you their perceived diagnosis. In part this 
relates to improved education, greater exposure 


to medical conditions through the media and 
the Internet. A patient who has previously had 
a condition that has recurred, e.g. asthma or 
urinary tract infection, or who has a flare-up 
of a chronic condition, e.g. inflammatory bowel 
disease, will often present in this way. Remember 
that many patients will be worrying about a spe¬ 
cific diagnosis causing their presenting complaint. 
This is particularly the case for breast lumps, 
rectal bleeding and chronic headache, where 
the perception may be that the only possible 
diagnosis is cancer. 

Self-diagnosis may also cause a delay in 
seeking medical help because the patient does 
not appreciate the significance of a symptom 
or subconsciously may not want to consider 
the possibility of serious disease. Common 
examples include attributing ischaemic chest 
pain to ‘indigestion’ and assuming that rectal 
bleeding is due to haemorrhoids. 

One way of initially handling patients who come 
with a diagnosis is to let them express this openly 
and then to acknowledge their concerns. You 
must respect these (indeed, the patient may 
well be right) while taking care not to miss a 
more likely diagnosis. In particular, do not take 
shortcuts with any of the components of history 
taking, examination and investigation that may 
be required. 

Patients with rare or unusual diseases often 
know much more about their condition than you 
Use this golden opportunity. There is no loss 
of face in admitting your ignorance. Patients 
will respect you for your honesty and you can 
learn much from them about the disease and 
its treatment and effects. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





Assessing patients: 
a practical guide 



Introduction 

Before you can diagnose patients you must first 
obtain the necessary clinical and investigative 
information. Diagnostic success depends upon 
the accuracy and completeness of this initial data 
gathering so your history-taking and examination 
skills are crucial During clinical training, you may 
have been taught a fairly idealized and rigid 
‘method’ of patient assessment. However, in 
everyday practice, a more flexible, fluid approach 
is preferable; this will allow you to adapt to 
the c inical situation and acquire the essential 
information in the most efficient manner 
Traditionally, the assessment of patients has 
been divided into two distinct phases: 

• the clinical assessment: history and 
physical examination 

• diagnostic investigations 

At least in the hospital setting, this distinction 
is highly artificial due to the easy and real-time 
availability of basic tests such as ECG, CXR, 
glucose meter reading and ABG, and routine 
laboratory blood tests such as FBC, U+E and 
LFTs. Wherever appropriate, these simple tests 
should be carried out in tandem with the clinical 
assessment to form a ‘routine patient work-up 
The information from all of these sources is com¬ 
bined to form a working or differential diagnosis. 
Where necessary, further targeted investigation 
can then be undertaken to confirm the suspected 
diagnosis, narrow the differential diagnosis, e.g. 
exclude high-risk conditions, inform prognosis 
and guide management 
Thus, in this book, we advocate the following 
system for patient evaluation: 

• the routine work-up: history, physical 
examination and basic tests 

• targeted supplementary investigations. 

The optimal approach to the routine work-up 
varies, depending on the stability and illness 
severity of the patient: 

• acutely unwell patients require a rapid, 
targeted evaluation (‘airway, breathing, 


circulation, disability, exposure [ABODE] 
assessment’) for life-threatening disorders 
and major derangements of physiology 

• patients who are stable, including those 
initially assessed by the ABODE approach, 
should have a full history and clinical 
examination, as outlined below (‘full clinical 
assessment’), alongside basic tests relevant 
to the specific presentation 

• the approach to frail, elderly patients may 
need to be modified to take account 

of differences in the nature of illness 
presentation, e.g. multi- versus single organ 
pathology; significant functional decline 
secondary to minor illness. 


Rapid assessment of the sick patient 

The ABODE assessment (see Clinical tool, p. 8) 
combines prompt identification of life-threatening 
pathology with immediate management of any 
abnormalities detected, prioritising those that are 
most rapidly fatal. Take an ABODE approach if 
the patient: 

• appears unwell or is unresponsive 

• exhibits evidence of acute physiological 
derangement on basic observations (HR, 
RR, BP, arterial oxygen saturation [Sp0 2 ], 
temperature) 

• has features of a serious acute problem in 
any organ system. 

Repeat the process to assess the effects of 
interventions or in the event of any further 
deterioration. Protect the spine at all times if 
there is any suspicion of recent trauma. 


Routine assessment of the stable patient: 
the full clinical assessment 

Use Macleod’s Clinical Examination for a 
comprehensive guide to history taking and 
systems-based clinical examination. The following 
is an aide-memoire with an emphasis on practical 
tips and avoidance of common pitfalls. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 









ASSESSING PATIENTS: A PRACTICAL GUIDE 


Clinical tool 

The ABODE assessment 

What to look for 

How to respond 

A Ai way 


A1 Ask ‘How are you feeling?’ 

If signs of obstruction: 

If patient can speak normally, airway is patent - move 

• Get help! 

straight to B. 

• Try simple airway manoeuvres: head tilt/chin lift; jaw 


thrust(Fig. 2.1) 

A2 Assess for airway obstruction 

• Remove foreign bodies/secretions from pharynx under 

• Lack of airflow at the mouth (complete obstruction) 

direct vision 

• Throat or tongue swelling 

• Insert Guedel or nasopharyngeal airway 

• Gurgling, snoring, choking, stridor 

If obstruction persists: 

• Paradoxical breathing (indrawing of chest with 

• Get expert assistance immediately 

expansion of abdomen on inspiration; vice-versa 

• Consider laryngeal mask airway or tracheal intubation 

on expiration) 

• In the context of anaphylaxis (see below), if throat or 

Only move to B once airway patent 

tongue swelling, give IM adrenaline (0.5 mg) 

B. Breathing 


B1 G ve high concentration 0 2 initially if hypoxaemic 


B2 Assess rate, depth and symmetry of breathing 

If respiratory effort inadequate: 

noting: 

• Get help! 

• Poor respiratory effort: IJ.RR, feeble, shallow 

• Manually ventilate via bag-valve-mask 

Breaths 

• Consider a trial of naloxone, if any suspicion of opiate 

• High respiratory effort: RR >20/min, use of 

Accessory muscles, visibly tiring 

• Asymmetrical chest expansion 

toxicity 

B3 Check for tracheal deviation 

If severe respiratory distress and signs of tension 


pneumothorax (p. 264), perform immediate needle 

B4 Percuss and auscultate chest, noting: 

aspiration. 

• Dullness - suggesting pleural effusion, collapse, 

If widespread wheeze, check for signs of anaphylaxis (see 

consolidation 

below) If present, manage as described; otherwise, 

• f breath sounds - suggesting collapse 
pneumothorax, pleural effusion 

• Wheeze - suggesting bronchospasm 

give nebulized bronchodilator. 

Crackles - suggesting pulmonary oedema, fibrosis 
consolidation 


• Bronchial breathing suggesting consolidation 


B5 Record Sp0 2 

If chronic type 2 respiratory failure or severe chronic 


obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), titrate fraction 
of inspired oxygen (FiCy to patient’s baseline Sp0 2 (if 
known) or 90-92%. In all other critically ill patients, 
continue high Fi0 2 . 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










ASSESSING PATIENTS: A PRACTICAL GUIDE 


9 


A 


Clinical tool—cont’d 

The ABCDE assessment 


What to look for 


How to respond 


C. Ci culation 

Cl Check colour & temperature of hands 

• Cold, clammy, blue, mottled? 

• Pink and warm? 

C2 Measure capillary refill time (CRT) 

Press firmly over fingertip for 5 sec, release pressure 
then record time taken for skin to return to normal 
colour 

• <2 sec is normal 

• >2 sec suggests iperipheral perfusion 

C3 Palpate radial and carotid pulse: 

• Tachycardia: >100 bpm 

• Bradycardia: <60 bpm (or inappropriately slow for 
context) 

• Thready, weak - suggesting -kardiac output, e.g. 
hypovolaemia 

• Bounding - suggesting hyperdynamic circulation, 
e.g. early sepsis 

C4 Measure blood pressure 

C5 Assess height of JVP at 45° 

C6 Auscultate the heart for: 

• Murmurs 

• 3rd heart sound/gallop rhythm 

C7 Attach ECG monitor and review rhythm: 

• Regular broad complex tachycardia - likely 
ven ricular tachycardia (VT) (p. 234) 

• Regular narrow complex tachycardia, e.g. sinus 
tachycardia, supraventricular tachycardia (SVT), a 
trial flutter (p. 232) 

• Irregular tachycardia - likely atrial fibrillation 

(p. 232) 

• Bradycardia <40 bpm, e.g. 2nd or 3rd degree 
atrioventricular (AV) block (p. 234) 

C8 Perform a 12-lead ECG if chest pain 
or arrhythmia 

D. Disability 

D1 Check capillary blood glucose (CBG) 


D2 Record Glasgow Coma Scale (p. 73) 


In patients with evidence of shock, e.g. tCRT, cold 
peripheries, thready pulse, tHR, IBP: 

Secure IV access (large bore if possible) 

If ventricular tachycardia (VT), attempt defibrillation with 
a synchronized DC shock (ask anaesthetist to sedate if 
conscious). 

If bradycardia: 

• Give atropine 0.5-3 mg 

• if no response or HR <40/min, get expert help and 
consider IV adrenaline or transcutaneous pacing 

If tongue/throat swelling, severe respiratory distress, 
widespread wheeze and/or a new rash, assume 
anaphylaxis: 

• Stop any potential trigger 

• Give 0.5 mg IM adrenaline (anterolateral aspect of 
middle 1/3 of the thigh) 

• Give fast IV fluids 

• Get immediate anaesthetic help 

Otherwise, give fluid challenge unless evidence of 

pulmonary oedema. 


If CBG <3 mmol/L: 

• Send blood for formal lab glucose measurement 

• Give immediate IV dextrose 

If IGCS 

• Perform an ABG if any suspicion of hypercapnia, e g 
chronic lung disease, depressed ventilation 

• Give 0.8-2 mg IV naloxone if Ipupil size or no obvious 
cause 

• Assess response after 1 min and consider further 
doses if partial response 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 











ASSESSING PATIENTS: A PRACTICAL GUIDE 


10 


4 

Clinical tool—cont’d 

The ABCDE assessment 


What to look for 

How to respond 


D3 Take a ‘3D’ history 

Description of symptoms 
Drugs and allergies 
Disorders/Disability prior to this illness 

D4 Examine pupils with a pen torch: 

• Bilateral pinpoint - suggests opioid intoxication or 
pontine lesion 

• Bilateral dilated - suggests cocaine/amphetamine 
or tricyclic antidep essant intoxication or atropine 

• Unilateral fixed, dilated suggests Tintracranial 
pressure or 3rd nerve palsy 

E. Exposure 

El Record body temperature 

E2 Fully expose the body (preserve dignity), looking 
for: 

• Bleeding or injuries 

• Rashes 

• Jaundice 

• Medic alert bracelet 

E3 Examine the abdomen for distension, 
tenderness, guarding, rigidity 


If temperature <34°C, confirm core temperature with 
a low-reading thermometer and start rewarming 
measures. 

Repeat the ABODE assessment if a significant abnormality 
was noted at any stage. 

Refer to the relevant chapter for further assessment of 
specific presentations, e.g. dyspnoea, shock, chest 
pain, IGCS, abdominal pain, headache. 



Fig. 2.1 Simple airway manoeuvres. [A] Head-tilt, chin-lift method. [B] Jaw-thrust method - preferred in patients with 
suspected neck injury. (From Douglas G, Nicol F, Robertson C. Macleod s Clinical Examination, 12th edn. Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone, 2009.) 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 














ASSESSING PATIENTS: A PRACTICAL GUIDE 


11 


The history 

Think of the history, not as a series of questions 
to be asked, but as a body of information that 
needs to be gathered using all available sources 
(Table 2.1 and Boxes 2. 1-2.3). History taking is, 
usually, the single most important component in 
the diagnostic process. It is also the one area 
that many doctors perform inadequately. Let the 
patient tell their story (the presenting complaint) in 
their own words without interrupting. Use ‘open’ 


Box 2.1 Features of alcohol dependence in the 
history 


• A strong, often overpowering, desire to take alcohol 

• Inability to control starting or stopping drinking and 
the amount that is drunk 

• Drinking alcohol in the morning 

• Tolerance, where increased doses are needed to 
achieve the effects originally produced by lower 
doses 

• Withdrawal state when drinking is stopped or 
reduced, including tremor, sweating, rapid heart 
rate, anxiety, insomnia and occasionally seizures, 
disorientation or hallucinations (delirium tremens). It 
is relieved by more alcohol 

• Neglect of other pleasures and interests 

• Continuing to drink in spite of being aware of the 
harmful consequences 


questions initially and give the patient time. Only 
then should you move to more focused, ‘closed’ 


2 


In particular, note: 

• a supplementary account of the current 
problem is essential in patients presenting 
with confusion or transient loss of 
consciousness 

• details of the past medical history are usually 
better established from the GP record and 
medical case notes than by simply asking 
the patient, particularly with respect to the 
outcome of previous investigations 

• if available, use a repeat prescription or 
GP record to obtain the specific names 
and dosages of drugs, then ask patients 
if they are actually taking the medicines 
as prescribed. Ask about the use of any 
additional over-the-counter or herbal 
remedies. Also ask the patient about 
side-effects of any current or previous 
medications. 

The clinical examination 

A routine ‘screening’ clinical examination (see 

Clinical tool, p 12) is required in most patients. 

Some elements of the clinical examination that 

have traditionally been considered routine are only 


Table 2.1 Key information required from the history 

Information to be established 

Specific details 

Sources of information 

Presenting complaint 

Full details of recent symptoms and events 

Patient, relatives, 
carers, witnesses, 

GP 

Past history 

Current and previous medical disorders 

Previous investigations and results 

Efficacy of previous treatments 

Medical case notes, GP 
record, patient 

Drugs and allergies 

All prescribed and over-the-counter medications 
and doses; adherence to prescription; recent 
changes to medications; adverse drug reactions 
(what drug? what happened?) 

Repeat prescription, 

GP record, patient, 
relatives, carers 

Environmental risk factors 

Smoking, alcohol (see Box 2.1) drug misuse 1 (see 

Box 2.2), travel, pets, sexual history 1 (see Box 

2.3) 

Patient, relatives 

Impact and consequences of 
illness (if relevant) 

Ability to mobilize, self-care, undertake activities 
(work, driving, hobbies) 

Effects on employment, family, finance, confidence 

Patient, relatives, 
friends, carers, GP 

’ Only if appropriate. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





















ASSESSING PATIENTS: A PRACTICAL GUIDE 


12 


Box 2.2 Non-prescribed drug history 


• What drugs are you taking? 

• How often and how much? 

• How long have you been taking drugs? 

• Any periods of abstinence? If so, when and why did 
you start using drugs again? 

• What symptoms do you have if you cannot obtain 
drugs? 

• Do you ever inject? 

• Do you ever share needles, syringes or other drug 
paraphernalia? 

• Do you see your drug use as a problem? 

• Do you want to make changes in your life or change 
the way you use drugs? 


Box 2.3 Sexual history questions 


• Do you have a regular sexual partner at the moment? 

• Is your partner male or female? 

• Have you had any (other) sexual partners in the last 
12 months? 

• How many were male? How many female? 

• Do you use barrier contraception - sometimes, 
always or never? 

• Have you ever had a sexually transmitted infection? 


Clinical tool 

The 20-step clinical examination 

1. Assess general demeanour, appearance, 

Sit the patient up at 90° 

movements, odour, nutrition and hydration. 

12. Inspect the trunk (front and back) for rashes, moles, 

2. Record routine observations, including temperature, 

spider naevi, scars etc. 

pulse, BP, RR and Sp0 2 . 

13. Palpate for lymphadenopathy and goitre; check for 

3. Examine the hands: temperature, capillary refill, 

bony/renal angle tenderness, sacral oedema. 

colour, nails, tremor, asterixis and joints. 

14. Examine the lung fields from the back. 

4. Feel the radial and brachial pulses. 


5. Inspect the face and eyes (Table 2.2). 

Lay the patient flat 

6. Examine the mouth: dental hygiene, cyanosis, 

15. Examine the abdomen and hernial orifices. 

tonsillar inflammation, ulcers, blisters and 

16. Examine the legs. 

candidiasis. 

Inspect for swelling, colour, rashes, skin changes. 


Feel for pitting, temperature, pulses, capillary 

Position the patient at 45° 

refill. 

7. Assess the height and waveform of the JVP and feel 

17. Perform a neurological examination of the legs. 

the carotid pulse. 

Check tone, look for wasting, abnormal 

8. Inspect and palpate the trachea: check centrality and 

movements. 

cricosternal distance. 

Assess power: fiexion/extension of hips, knees, 

9. Inspect and palpate the praecordium. 

ankles. 

10. Auscultate the heart. 

Check reflexes: knees, ankle jerks, plantar 

11. Examine the lung fields from the front. 

response. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

















ASSESSING PATIENTS: A PRACTICAL GUIDE 


13 


Clinical tool—cont’d 

The 20-step clinical examination 


Test sensation: L2-S1 dermatomes (see Fig. 

22.1, p. 200). 

Test coordination: heel-shin test (Fig. 2.2B). 
Assess transfer and gait (p. 21 5). 

Sit the patient up 

18. Perform a neurological examination of the arms. 
Check tone, look for wasting, abnormal 
movements. 

Assess power: abduction/adduction of shoulders, 
fingers; flexion/extension of elbows, wrists; grip 
strength. 

Check reflexes: supinator, biceps, triceps. 

Test sensation: C5-T1 dermatomes (see Fig. 

22.1, p. 221). 

Test coordination: rapid alternating movements 
and finger-nose test (Fig. 2.2A). 


19. Screen for cranial nerve abnormalities. 

Test visual acuity and pupillary reactions; check 
for homonymous field defects. 

Check eye movements (characterize nystagmus) 
and hearing in each ear. 

Test sensation above the upper lip and over the 
maxillae and eyelids. 

Facial movements: raise eyebrows, show teeth, 
close eyes against resistance, blow out cheeks. 

20. Perform urinalysis and bedside capillary blood 
glucose measurement. 


Table 2.2 Characteristic faces and their features, including facial expression 

Disorder 

Appearance 

Acromegaly 

Coarsening with enlarged features, e.g. nose, lips, orbital ridges and jaw 
(prognathism) 

Hypothyroidism 

Pale, puffy skin with loss of lateral third of eyebrows 

Hyperthyroidism 

Startled appearance with lid ret action 

Cushing's disease 

‘Moon face’, plethoric complexion and buffalo hump over lower 
cervical-upper thoracic spine 

Parkinsonism 

Expressionless faces and drooling 

Myasthenia gravis 

Expressionless faces with bilateral ptosis 

Myotonia dystrophica 

Frontal baldness and bilateral ptosis 

Superior vena caval obstruction 

Plethoric, oedematous face and neck, chemosis of conjunctivae, 
prominent veins and venules 

Malar flush 

Dusky redness of cheeks seen in low cardiac output e.g. mitral 
stenosis; also seen in myxoedema 

Systemic lupus erythematosus 

Rash over nose and cheeks - 'butterfly rash’ 

Progressive systemic sclerosis 

Taut skin around mouth with ‘beaking’ of nose 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

























14 


ASSESSING PATIENTS: A PRACTICAL GUIDE 



Fig. 2.2 Tests of coordination. [A] 

Finger-nose test. [B] Heel-shin test 
(From Ford MJ, Hennessey I, Japp A 
Introduction to Clinical Examination, 
8th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, 2005.) 



required in specific circumstances. These include 
examination of the fundi, rectum, genitalia, breasts 
and individual joints. 

Additional steps 

• You will gain an impression of higher 
mental function through taking the history. 

If you suspect impairment, perform an 
Abbreviated Mental Test (AMT; Box 2.4). 

• If you detect a relevant abnormality on the 
routine examination, perform a detailed 
examination of the relevant system (see 
Macleod's Clinical Examination). 

• Additional examination steps required for a 
specific presentation are described in the 
relevant chapters: 

• testicular examination (p. 258) 

• breast examination (p. 49) 

• examination for meningeal irritation (p. 1 69) 

• examination of lumbar spinal 
movements (p. 211) 

• ‘confusion assessment method’ for 
detection of delirium (p. 80) 


Box 2 4 Abbreviated mental test 


(Score 1 for each correct response) 

• How old are you? 

• What is the time just now? 

• What year is it? 

• What is the name of this place? (Where are we just 
now?) 

Please memorize the following address: 42 West Street 

• When is your birthday (date and month)? 

• What year did the First World War begin? 

• What is the name of the Queen? 

• Can you recognize ... ? Two people? 

• Count backwards from 20 to 1 

• Repeat the address that I gave you 
Normal score: 8-10 


Source: Hodkinson HM 1972. Evaluation of a mental test score 
for assessment of mental impairment in the elderly. Age Ageing. 
1:233-238. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 






















ASSESSING PATIENTS: A PRACTICAL GUIDE 


15 


• assessment of gait (p. 21 5) 

• head thrust test (p. 101) 

• Dix-Hallpike manoeuvre (p. 1 03) 

• jaw jerk (p. 109). 

Basic investigations 

The specific tests required for a routine work-up 
depend on the presenting problem. For example, 
an ECG is mandatory in patients with acute chest 
pain but not in those with chronic low back pain. 
The recommended tests for different clinical 
presentations are specified in the relevant chapters 
in Part 2. In several chapters we give detailed 
guidance on interpreting these tests, including: 

• the ECG in chest pain (p. 54) 

• arterial blood gases (p. 116) 

• pulmonary function tests (p. 1 27) 

• pleural tap and analysis of pleural fluid (p. 1 29) 

• lumbar puncture and CSF analysis (p. 170) 

• a septic screen (p. 142) 

• anaemia (p. 136) 

• renal failure (p. 230) 

• hyponatraemia (p. 88). 


Approach to the frail, elderly patient 

Frail, elderly patients comprise a major proportion 
of acute medical and surgical admissions and 
are frequently challenging to assess and treat. 
They often present in a vague, non-specific way, 
and in many cases with acute delirium. This can 
result in difficulty identifying the specific culprit for 
the acute deterioration, especially as many will 
have a background of multiple chronic comorbidi 
ties and functional limitation. One unfortunate 
consequence of this is the tendency to categorize 
elderly patients into a small number of ‘diagnostic 
dustbins'. Instead of a differential diagnosis, the 
impression at the end of the clerking may read 
‘Off legs’, ‘Mechanical fall, ‘Social admission’ 
or ‘Collapse ?Cause’ Such impressions could 
be correct, but they are not diagnoses. 

The challenges of acute assessment in the 
elderly are often compounded by a misconcep¬ 
tion that the process must always be painstaking 
and laborious. Comprehensive geriatric assess¬ 
ment does require time and input from multiple 
health professionals but it is often preferable 
to defer this for a period than to undertake it 
poorly in the midst of a busy acute admission. 
Where time and personnel are limited, use a 


focused approach to identify important problems 
rapidly and reliably, and to produce a useful list 
of differential diagnoses. 

Chronological age is a poor marker for identify¬ 
ing who would benefit from a tailored ‘geriatric’ 
assessment. Some elderly patients present with a 
single specific acute pathology, e.g. the fit 90-year- 
old with an acute myocardial infarction. This patient 
may require rapid coronary revascularization rather 
than a comprehensive geriatric assessment. 
Conversely, a 59-year-old with multiple medical 
problems and medications, and an inability to 
mobilize may benefit greatly from a geriatric 
assessment. Frailty is the increased vulnerability in 
reserve and function across multiple physiological 
systems such that the ability to withstand acute 
stressors is compromised. Identification of frailty is 
difficult, and debate continues over robust criteria. 
Formal frailty scores such as the Edmonton Frailty 
Scale (www.nscphealth.co.uk/edmontonscale-pd1) 
can be used to grade the degree of frailty and 
various screening tools have been developed 
for use in acute settings to help identify patients 
most likely to benefit from comprehensive geriatric 
assessment. As a guide, the presence of two or 
more of these criteria suggests frailty: 

• functional decline, e.g. inability to perform 
basic activities of daily living (ADLs) 

• confusion (delirium, dementia) 

• polypharmacy 

• care home resident 

• recent immobility or falls 

• >1 unplanned admissions in the past 
3 months 

• difficulty in walking 

• malnutrition 

• incontinence. 


2 


I Specific tips for assessment of the elderly/ 

frail patient 

An accurate history is important in the frail, elderly 
patient, but may be significantly more difficult 
to obtain 

• Use open questions sparingly. 

• Clarify vague terms, e.g. ‘a while’, and 
question inconsistencies, e.g. if patients 
cannot recall the details of their ‘fall, how 
do they know that they did not black out? 

• Wherever possible, complement the 
patient’s history with collateral information 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 









ASSESSING PATIENTS: A PRACTICAL GUIDE 


16 


from witnesses, carers, relatives, other 
health professionals and previous notes. 

Frail patients may tire easily during the history 
and examination: 

• If necessary, perform the assessment in 
‘bite-sized’ chunks. 

• If there are multiple symptoms, address 
them in order of importance to the patient, 
unless they are ‘red-flag’. 

• If the list of established diagnoses is long, 
determine which problems are ‘active’ 
(‘When did you last have angina?’) and 
explore those re evant to the current 
presentation in detail. 

Prioritize important and common problems in 
the systemic enquiry. 

• How far can you walk? 

• Can you manage a flight of stairs? 

• What stops you? 

• Do you have a cough? 

• When did you last move your bowels? 

• Do you have any difficulty passing urine? 

• Have you been incontinent? 

• Have you lost weight? 

• Have you fallen or blacked out? 

• Do you get dizzy? 

• Do you have any weakness or numbness in 
your face or limbs? 

• Are you forgetful? 

An exhaustive ‘social history’ during the initial 
assessment is often unproductive. 

• Establish the key information regarding 
functional status and social/care 
arrangements but avoid replicating work 
that will be undertaken by other health 
professionals, e.g. occupational therapist. 

• Do not overlook specific issues in the social 
history, e.g. alcohol intake, driving. 

Inspection 

Certain aspects of the examination demand 
closer attention in the elderly. 

• Observe carefully for evidence of 
dehydration, malnutrition, constipation, 
injuries and pressure sores in frail, 
dependent or demented patients. 

• Consider a formal swallow test to exclude 
aspiration in patients with recurrent 
pneumonia. 


Elderly patients with abdominal pathology may 
present ‘atypically’. 

• Consider perforation of a viscus or 
ischaemic bowel, even in the absence of 
abdominal rigidity - have a low threshold for 
imaging 

• Percussion and palpation of the bladder 
may reveal ‘asymptomatic’ urinary retention 
in patients with non-specific deterioration. 
Most elderly patients can follow the instructions 

required for a standard neurological examination 

• Try to overcome sensory impairment with 
aids (put the hearing aid in!), repetition and 
demonstration 

• If the patient struggles to cooperate, 
obtain equivalent information by observing 
movement, passive or provoked 

• Pay close attention to muscle bulk, gait 
(p. 215), visual acuity and functional 
movements of the arms and hands 

• Assess joint movements in conjunction 
with the neurological examination. 

Screening for cognitive impairment 

is an integral part of examination in the 
elderly: use objective tests, e.g. AMT 
(see Box 2.4) or 4AT (p. 80), rather than 
general impressions. Record the score, 
even if the patient appears to have intact 
cognition - documentation of a normal 
baseline may aid a subsequent diagnosis 
of delirium. 

Depression is common in elderly hospitalized 
patients and is a well-recognized mimicker of 
dementia. 

• Maintain a high index of suspicion 
but remember that low mood may be 
situational and appropriate (‘stuck in 
hospital’). 

• Exclude organic disease before attributing 
‘biological symptoms’ to depression. 

Basic investigations have a higher yield in 
elderly patients due to the increased prevalence 
of disease and the frequent absence of charac¬ 
teristic clinical features. 

• Perform FBC, U+E, ECG and CXR in 
any elderly patient with non-specific 
deterioration. 

• Have a low threshold for considering 
additional tests such as CRP, LFTs, 
calcium or TFTs. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





The diagnostic process 



With time and practice, most trainees will acquire 
the skills necessary to take a history, perform 
a competent physical examination and interpret 
basic tests. The next stage is to translate the 
resulting raw clinical data into a diagnosis. The 
primary aim of this book is to show you how 
this can be achieved. 

Diagnostic methods 

The exact method by which a diagnosis is 
reached may seem mysterious to newcomers to 
clinical medicine. The best diagnosticians invari¬ 
ably use several complementary skills which have 
been honed through years or decades of experi¬ 
ence; these are often applied subconsciously and 
hence are difficult to explain. Consequently, the 
diagnostic process may be taught poorly and, 
most often, is simply experienced at second 
hand, by observation. 

As an inexperienced clinician you cannot 
expect to achieve diagnostic skills overnight, 
but this book aims to show you how to make 
a diagnosis in the great majority of the most 
commonly encountered and important clinical 
presentations. As a first step, it helps to consider 
two well-established, contrasting approaches 
to diagnosis: pattern recognition and prob¬ 
ability analysis. These methods illustrate some 
fundamental principles of diagnostic reasoning 
but both have major drawbacks that limit their 
application in everyday practice. 

Pattern recognition 

The diagnosis is made by recognising character¬ 
istic features of the patient's illness that you have 
encountered previously in other patients with the 
same disorder. For most people, visual informa¬ 
tion is a strong prompt to memory recall, so the 
techn que is particularly helpful for conditions with 
an obvious abnormality of appearance, e g. skin 
conditions. Moving visual images are even more 
evocative. Ornithologists commonly describe how 


they recognize a bird by its ‘jizz’ - a combination 
of its appearance movement and behaviour. 
Some medical conditions, e.g. Parkinsonism, 
are readily identified in a similar way. 

Pattern recognition can be a powerful 
technique, particularly when employed by an 
experienced clinician. In theory, it requires you 
to have experienced an identical, or at least very 
similar, presentation previously, and so is less 
suited to the newcomer. However, the diagnostic 
method most commonly utilized by medical 
students and junior doctors is actually a variant 
of this approach. The major difference is that 
their ‘database’ of patterns corresponds to the 
descriptions of signs and symptoms provided in 
textbooks rather than previous real-life examples. 
This has several major disadvantages. Firstly, 
descriptions of physical signs from textbooks or 
lectures, e.g pill-rolling tremor or festinating gait, 
are poor substitutes for experiencing them at first 
hand Textbooks also tend to present an idealized 
account of the way in which illnesses present 
emphasising classical signs and symptoms 
that are often relatively rare in everyday clinical 
practice. Similarly, a reliance on textbook learning 
does not allow you to appreciate the multiple 
subtle variations in presentation that exist for the 
same disorder. Pattern recognition may fail even 
the most experienced clinician when conditions 
present atypically or when characteristic features 
are masked, e.g. the patient with acute coronary 
syndrome who has sharp chest pain rather than 
crushing or heavy discomfort, or the diabetic 
patient who has no pain or discomfort at all 
because of coexistent autonomic neuropathy. 
This tendency is greatly amplified when these 
conditions have not been experienced repeatedly 
in the real world. 

Probability analysis 

For the great majority of conditions, no single 
symptom, sign or test will have sufficient power 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 






THE DIAGNOSTIC PROCESS 


18 


to enable you to rule in or rule out a diagnosis. 
However, each will alter the probability of the 
diagnosis to a greater or lesser extent. The 
diagnostic weighting of a particular symptom, 
sign or test can be expressed as a likelihood ratio 
(LR). The LR is the proportion of patients with 
the specific disease who exhibit the particular 
finding, divided by the proportion without the 
disease who also exhibit the same finding. Note 
that the finding may be positive, e.g. presence 
of a particular sign, or negative, e.g. absence 
of a particular sign. 

If the LR value is >1, the chance of the disease 
is increased; the higher the value, the greater 
the likelihood of the disease. If the LR value is 
<1, the chance of the disease being present is 
reduced. For example, an LR of 5 increases the 
absolute probability of a disease by approximately 
30% and an LR of -0.2 decreases it by 30%. 

LRs are available for many clinical features and 
tests. In theory, this allows you to use the infor¬ 
mation derived from your assessment to calculate 
the probability of a disease. However, before 
you can do this, you need to know the pre-test 
probability of the patient having the disease in 
question - in other words, the prevalence of 
the disease in a population with similar baseline 
characteristics to your patient. Among other 
things, the pre-test probability may be influenced 
by a patient’s age, sex, ethnic origin, occupation, 
social background and past history, as well as 
the clinica setting within which you work (rural 
versus urban environment, primary care versus 
secondary care). For example, the probability of 
Plasmodium falciparum malaria being the cause 
of headache, myalgia and fever in a previously fit, 
19-year-old in the UK in the middle of a winter 
influenza epidemic is vanishingly small, but it 
will be very much higher for a similar individual 
returning from sub-Saharan Africa. 

Another problem with using LRs to calculate 
probability lies in trying to combine information 
from multiple symptoms, physical signs and 
test results. This is hampered by a need for the 
findings to be independent of each other - an 


area of considerable uncertainty. In practice, it 
is not usually possible to combine more than 
two or three LRs outside a validated scoring 
system. For readers interested in using LRs to 
calculate diagnostic probabilities, we recommend 
Evidence Based Physical Diagnosis, by Steven 
McGee (4th edn, 2017, Elsevier). 

In everyday practice, this approach has two 
major applications. Firstly, knowledge of LRs 
for different symptoms, risk factors or clinical 
signs allows you to identify those with the 
highest diagnostic value. As a rough rule of 
thumb, LR values between 0.5 and 2 are rarely 
helpful, whereas values >5 or <0.2 are usually 
clinically useful. Secondly, for some conditions, 
LRs have been used to develop and validate 
diagnostic algorithms that allow the condition 
to be ruled in or ruled out based on thresholds 
of probability. Examples are the Wells scores for 
deep vein thrombosis (p. 193) and pulmonary 
thromboembolism (p. 120). 

A different approach: tailored 
diagnostic guides 

For the inexperienced clinician, neither fuzzy 
pattern recognition nor rigid probability analysis 
offers a practical and satisfactory approach to 
diagnostic reasoning. We therefore advocate 
an alte native system that takes positive 
elements from both of these methods but is 
easy to apply in everyday practice and does 
not rely on vast amounts of clinical experi¬ 
ence. We set out this system in the form 
of individual ‘diagnostic guides’ for all of 
the major presenting clinical problems. With 
experience, you will start to use your own 
unique methods but, at the outset, following 
an established framework may help to prevent 
crass, potentially damaging, errors. 

Each chapter in Part 2 is a diagnostic guide or 
‘road-map’ for a common clinical presentation. 
The purpose of the guides is not to tell you which 
questions to ask and which examination steps to 
perform - this was outlined in Chapter 2 and will 
be broadly similar for most presentations. Rather, 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





THE DIAGNOSTIC PROCESS 


19 


it is to explain how to use the information you 
have extracted from the history, examination and 
initial tests to work toward a diagnosis. 

To do this, we focus on the most valuable 
pieces of diagnostic data - those symptom char¬ 
acteristics, signs and test results with the greatest 
potential to narrow the differential diagnosis or 
to rule in/rule out suspected conditions. 

The guides follow a logical and consistent 
approach designed to reflect contemporary 
medical practice. They provide a secure frame¬ 
work to work within but are not rigid protocols 
and allow ample scope for clinical judgement. 

The highest priority is always given to imme¬ 
diately life-threatening problems. In some cases, 
this means focusing on aims of assessment other 
than diagnosis, e.g. gauging illness severity or 
determining resuscitation requirements. The next 
aim is, wherever necessary, to exclude major 
pathology; for each of the most serious potential 
disorders, the guides will identify those patients 
who require further investigation to rule in or 
rule out the diagnosis. Thereafter we prioritize 
diagnostic information with the highest yield 
whilst avoiding data that do not significantly alter 
probabilities or help to target investigation. In 
situations where the information obtained from 
the routine work-up is unlikely to yield a clear 
working diagnosis we may opt to provide a 
strategy for further investigation to help narrow 
the differential diagnosis. 


How to use the diagnostic guides 

The first step is to determine which guide if any, 
is the most appropriate for the patient in front of 
you. Ensure that you have clarified the true nature 
of the problem; a patient who presents with a fall 
may have had a black out, whilst a patient who 
has had a ‘funny turn’ may have experienced 
focal limb weakness. In general, you should 
match the guide to the patient’s predominant 
complaint. However if the presentation entails 
two or more related symptoms, e.g. abdominal 
pain + dysphagia; dyspnoea + haemoptysis, we 
recommend choosing the symptom with the 


narrower differential diagnosis (dysphagia or 
haemoptysis in the examples above). 

After you have decided on which guide to 
use, the format is simple to follow: 

• each begins with the differential diagnosis: 
a rundown of the important diagnoses 

to consider for the particular presenting 
problem 

• we then present an overview of 
assessment: this is essentially a flowchart 
that lays out the route to diagnosis. It is 
vital that you understand the format of the 
overview so an example is provided in Fig. 
3.1 and is explained below 

• each overview is accompanied by a 
step-by-step assessment. This is a textual 
companion to the overview that explains 
and expands on each individual step 

• some chapters also contain details on 
further assessment of common disorders or 
abnormalities that may have been identified 
during the initial assessment 


3 


The example in Fig, 3.1 shows the initial stages of 
the overview of assessment for jaundice (shown 
fully in Ch. 19). 

• Blue boxes are stages of action - they 
contain the steps of assessment that you 
need to undertake. This will always include 
one of the two principal methods of clinical 
assessment outlined in Chapter 2 (‘airway, 
breathing, circulation, disability, exposure 
[ABCDE]’ or ‘full clinical assessment’) p us 
the essential basic tests, e.g. ECG CXR 
and any necessary additional examination 
steps. Note: The diagnostic process that 
follows assumes that you have performed 
these steps and extracted the relevant 
clinical information. 

• Yellow boxes are stages of diagnostic 
reasoning - they do not show ‘what to do 
now’ but rather ‘what to think about now’. 
Each numbered step in the diagnostic 
process is accompanied by a detailed 
explanation in the step-by-step assessment 
section (see above). 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 






THE DIAGNOSTIC PROCESS 


20 


ABODE + ECG, CXR ± ABG 



Fig. 3.1 A guide to using the 'overview of assessment. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


























THE DIAGNOSTIC PROCESS 


21 


• Red boxes represent important elements 
of the assessment that are independent of 
the diagnostic process, e.g. evaluation 

of illness severity or resuscitation 
requirements. 

• Green boxes represent the potential 
endpoints of the diagnostic process As 


with the yellow boxes, explanatory text is 
provided in the accompanying step-by- 
step assessment. In some cases, further 
investigation may be required to confirm the 
diagnosis, refine it, assess severity or guide 
optimal management; if so, the necessary 
steps will be outlined in the text. 


3 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 




Section 2 

Assessment of common 
presenting problems 


4. Abdominal pain 24 

5. Breast lump 46 

6. Chest pain 50 

7 Coma and altered consciousness 72 

8. Confusion: delirium and dementia 78 

9. Diarrhoea 90 

10. Dizziness 96 

11. Dysphagia 108 

12. Dyspnoea 112 

13. Fatigue 130 

14. Fever 138 

15. Gastrointestinal haemorrhage: haematemesis and rectal bleeding 

16. Haematuria 158 

17. Haemoptysis 162 

18. Headache 166 

19. Jaundice 174 

20. Joint swelling 184 

21. Leg swelling 190 

22. Limb weakness 196 


23. Low back pain 208 


24. 

Mobility problems: falls and immobility 

214 

25. 

Nausea and vomiting 

222 

26. 

Palpitation 

232 

27. 

Rash: acute generalized skin eruption 

240 

28. 

Red eye 

250 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


29. Scrotal swelling 258 

30 Shock 264 

31. Transient loss of consciousness: syncope and seizures 270 

32. Urinary incontinence 282 

33. Vaginal bleeding 288 

34. Weight loss 294 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



Abdominal pain 


Acute abdominal pain 

Acute abdominal pain has a vast differential 
diagnosis. The spectrum of disease severity is 
also wide, ranging from the life-threatening to 
the innocuous. Effective assessment requires 
the rapid recognition of critically unwell patients 
and, where appropriate, targeted investigations. 
Causes of acute abdominal pain are listed below. 
The numbers in brackets correspond to the 
different regions of the abdomen, as displayed 
in Fig. 4.1, at which the pain is typically most 
prominent: 

• cholecystitis/cholangitis (1) 

• biliary colic (1,2) 

• hepatitis (1,2) 

• pneumonia (1 or 3) 

• peptic ulcer disease/gastritis (2) 

• acute coronary syndrome (2) 

• pancreatitis (2, 5) 

• ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) 
(2,5) 

• splenic rupture (3, diffuse) 

• renal calculus (4, 7 or 6, 9) 

• pyelonephritis (4 or 6) 

• early appendicitis (5, diffuse) 

• established appendicitis (7) 

• terminal ileitis, e.g. Crohn’s disease, 

Yersinia (7) 

• mesenteric adenitis (7, diffuse) 

• diverticulitis (7 or 9) 

• colitis (7, 8, 9) 

• ectopic pregnancy (7, 8, 9) 

• pelvic inflammatory disease/endometriosis 
(7, 8, 9) 

• ovarian torsion/cyst rupture (7, 8, 9) 

• lower urinary tract infection (UTI)/cystitis (8) 

• intestinal obstruction (diffuse) 

• perforation (diffuse) 

• mesenteric ischaemia (diffuse) 

• gastroenteritis (diffuse mid-/ 
upper-abdominal) 


• diabetic ketoacidosis/hypercalcaemia/ 
adrenal crisis (diffuse) 

• functional abdominal pain (any region 
or diffuse). 

Key questions 

What are the characteristics of the pain? 

An educated analysis of a patient’s abdominal 
pain symptoms yields immeasurable information. 
The mnemonic ‘SOCRATES’ is often helpful: 
consider the Site, Onset, Character, Radiation, 
Associated features, Timing, Exacerbating factors 
and Severity of the pain. Based on these features, 
it should be possible to distinguish between most 
of the above causes of pain. 

Visceral pain is conducted by autonomic nerve 
fibres, so its location corresponds to the embryo- 
logical origin of the affected structure (Fig. 4.2). 
The pain may arise from distension or excessive 
contraction (spasm) of hollow organs. It also arises 
from tissue damage (inflammation), ischaemia or 
direct chemical stimulation of pain receptors in 
organs. It is typically dull and poorly localized and is 
not associated with abdominal guarding or rigidity. 
True ‘colicky’ pain reflects intermittent episodes of 
intense smooth muscle contraction that produce 
short-lived spasms of discomfort lasting seconds 
to minutes before subsiding. Some disorders are 
described as ‘colic’ but are actually pseudocolic, 
(e.g. renal or biliary colic). In these cases, the pain 
builds to a crescendo over several minutes before 
reaching a steady peak that may last for several 
hours before easing. Visceral pain may also be 
constant, for example in bowel ischaemia. 

Somatic pain arises from irritation and 
inflammation of the parietal peritoneum and is 
conducted by somatic nerves. It is sharp, well 
localized, constant and often associated with 
local tenderness and guarding Widespread 
inflammation of the parietal peritoneum produces 
generalized peritonitis. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 







ABDOMINAL PAIN 


Differential diagnosis 


Referred pain is perceived at a site remote 
from its source and arises due to convergence 
of nerve fibres at the same spinal cord level 
(Fig. 4.3). 

Is there a systemic inflammatory response? 

Many serious causes of acute abdominal pain 
either stem from or provoke an inflammatory 
process within the abdominal cavity. The pres¬ 
ence of fever, TCRP or TWBC with neutrophilia 
suggests that the patient is mounting an acute 
systemic inflammatory response (Box 4.1) and 



Fig. 4.1 Regions of the abdomen. See text for typical 
sites of pain (From Ford MJ, Hennessey I, Japp A. 
Introduction to Clinical Examination, 8th edn. Edinburgh: 
Churchi I Livingstone, 2005.) 


may thereby contribute to the diagnostic process. 
In some patients, the presence of inflammatory 
features may assist the interpretation of uncertain 
physical signs, e.g. mild localized abdominal ten¬ 
derness, reinforcing suspicion of local peritonitis. 
In patients without a clear cause for pain, these 
features may suggest the need for admission 
and further investigation. By the same token, 
the absence of these features can, when used 
correctly, help to exclude important inflammatory 
pathology. Finally, recognising and grading the 
presence of a systemic inflammatory response 
are central to the assessment of illness severity. 

Note that the significance of an individual result 
depends on the ciinical context, particularly with 
respect to CRP. In general, the higher the result, 
the greater the extent of systemic inflammation. 
A marginal rise in CRP, e.g. <30 mg/L, does 
not provide compelling evidence of a major 
inflammatory process. Plowever if the test is 
being used to help ‘rule out’ a condition, then 
it is safer to regard any limit above the upper 
range of normal as elevated 


Box 4.1 Indicators of systemic inflammation 


• Fever (>38°C) 

• TCRP (>10 mg/L) 1 * 

• WBC >11 x 10 9 /L or <4 x 10 9 /L 


1 The significance of the result depends on the clinical 

context - see text. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















ABDOMINAL PAIN 


Differential diagnosis 



■ Foregut-pain localises 
to epigastric area 

Midgut-pain localises 
to periumbilical area 

■ Hindgut-pain localises 
to suprapubic area 


Fig. 4.2 Abdominal pain. Pe ception of visceral pain is localized to the epigastric, umbilical or suprapubic region, 
according to the embryolog cal origin of the affected organ. (From Douglas G, Nico F, Robertson C. Macleod's Clinical 
Examination, 12th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2009.) 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













ABDOMINAL PAIN 


Differential diagnosis 



Fig. 4.3 Characteristic radiation of pain from the gallbladder, diaphragm and ureter. (From Douglas G, Nicol F, Robertson 
C. Macleod's Clinical Examination, 12th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2009.) 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





















ABDOMINAL PAIN 


Differential diagnosis 


Chronic/episodic abdominal pain 

Chronic abdominal pain is common and challeng¬ 
ing to assess. Careful evaluation with targeted 
investigation is required to exclude organic pathol¬ 
ogy. Most younger patients will have a functional 
disorder, e.g. irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), but 
this should be a diagnosis of exclusion. In older 
patients with new, persistent abdominal pain, 
the priority is to exclude underlying malignancy. 

Gastroduodenal disorders 

Peptic ulcer disease is a common cause of 
chronic upper abdominal pain. Almost all 
duodenal ulcers and 70% of gastric ulcers are 
attributable to H. pylori infection. Typical features 
include recurrent episodes of burning or gnawing 
discomfort, relationship to food (variable), and 
associated dyspeptic symptoms, e.g. nausea, 
belching and relief with antacids. Classically, pain 
from gastric ulcers occurs several minutes after 
eating whereas pain from duodenal ulcers occur 
hours later and may be relieved by food. 

Gastritis without frank ulceration may produce 
similar symptoms. 

Gastric cancer occurs more frequently in 
patients >55 years In addition to pain, associ¬ 
ated symptoms include early satiety, unintentional 
weight loss and vomiting. All of the above disor¬ 
ders are best diagnosed by upper gastrointestinal 
endoscopy (UGIE). 

Gallstones 

Most gallstones are asymptomatic. 

Biliary colic occurs when a gallstone obstructs 
the cystic duct, causing gallbladder distension. It 
tends to occur 1-6 hours after a meal, manifesting 
as intense, dull, RUQ or epigastric pain ± radiation 
to the back or scapula (see Fig. 4.3). The pain 
builds to a crescendo over minutes, and may last 
several hours before subsiding. It does not cause 
jaundice, deranged LFTs or abdominal signs. USS 
should confirm the presence of gallstones or, rarely, 
demonstrate pathological gallbladder changes. In 
cholecystitis, infection of the gallbladder due to 
gallstones obstructing the cystic duct occurs. The 
pain classically persists over time, is associated 
with a fever and there may be jaundice in cases 
of Mirizzi’s syndrome (where a large gallstone 
and inflamed gallbladder wall causes extrinsic 
compression of the common hepatic duct). 


Choledocholithiasis (stone in the common 
bile duct - CBD) causes cholestatic jaundice 
(see Ch. 19) with less severe upper abdominal 
pain, or indeed no pain. In ascending cholangitis, 
infection of the biliary tree occurs upstream from 
a blockage in the CBD (gallstone, tumour, liver 
fluke). Patients present with significant sepsis 
(pyrexia), jaundice and abdominal discomfort 
(Charcot’s triad). 

Pancreatic pain 

Acute pancreatitis causes severe upper abdomi¬ 
nal pain that radiates to the back, often with 
repeated vomiting. It is associated, depending 
on the severity, with a systemic inflammatory 
response and may progress to multiorgan failure 
The majority of cases are caused by gallstones 
passing down the common bile duct and irritating 
the pancreas or by alcohol directly injuring the 
pancreas. Chronic pancreatitis develops in a 
subset of patients with recurrent episodes of 
acute pancreatitis. In some patients, it is constant 
and unremitting, while in others, episodes are 
provoked by drinking alcohol or eating. Associ¬ 
ated features include weight loss, anorexia and, 
in advanced disease, diabetes mellitus (endocrine 
deficiency) and steatorrhoea (exocrine insuffi¬ 
ciency). The majority of cases are due to chronic 
alcohol excess. Diagnosis is usually made by CT 
but endoscopic ultrasound with biopsy may be 
required to rule out malignancy. Unlike acute 
pancreatitis, serum amylase is usually unhepful; 
J-faecal elastase indicates pancreatic exocrine 
insufficiency. 

Pancreatic cancer may cause severe, unrelent¬ 
ing pain in the upper abdomen that radiates to 
the back (50% patients), and is usually associated 
with cachexia ± cholestatic jaundice. 

Mesenteric ischaemia 

Chronic mesenteric ischaemia is a rare cause of 
chronic abdominal pain that tends to occur in 
patients with widespread severe atherosclerotic 
disease. Dull periumbilical or lower abdominal 
pain develops approximately 30 minutes after 
eating (‘abdominal angina') and may be associ¬ 
ated with bloody diarrhoea. This may lead to 
a fear of eating so weight loss is common. 
However, even the patient who eats ‘normally’ is 
often cachectic due to poor absorption. The diag¬ 
nosis is made by CT mesenteric angiography. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 









ABDOMINAL PAIN 


Acute mesenteric ischaemia presents very differ¬ 
ently: acute, agonizing, constant diffuse abdominal 
pain with minimal examination findings (poor 
localization, no peritonism), systemic upset and, 
usually, lactic acidosis. It is a surgical emergency 
with a high mortality. It is due either to mesenteric 
embolism 50% (patients may have atrial fibrillation), 
thrombosis in situ 25% (atherosclerotic disease), 
congestive venous infarction due to mesenteric vein 
thrombosis (5%) or due to non-occlusive causes 
(20%) such as cardiac failure or septic shock. 

Inflammatory bowel disease 

Colitis due to either Crohn’s disease or ulcerative 
colitis may cause cramping lower abdominal pain, 
usually in association with bloody diarrhoea. Small 
bowel inflammation in Crohn’s disease is often 
manifest by persistent cramping periumbilical or 
RLQ pain ± diarrhoea (non-bloody) and constitu¬ 
tional upset. Subacute small bowel obstruction 
due to oedema or fibrosis (strictures) may lead 
to colicky postprandial abdominal discomfort. 
Both disorders are also associated with a range 
of extraintestinal features (see Box 9.3, p. 91). 

|Colon cancer 

This is a common cancer in men and women. 
In many countries, screening programmes 
detect tumours before they cause symptoms. 
However, patients may present with colicky lower 
abdominal pain (from partial or complete bowel 
obstruction). Other important features include 
a history of weight loss, change in bowel habit 
(alternating between constipation and diarrhoea 
as liquid faeces bypasses around firmer stool 
that is partially held up), rectal bleeding and iron 
deficiency anaemia. Tenesmus is a feature of 
low rectal tumours. Right-sided cancers present 
insidiously with vague pain and iron deficiency 
anaemia. This is because the proximal colon is 
more distensible and contains liquid faeces, so 
obstructive features are not seen and blood loss is 
occult. Diagnosis is usually made by colonoscopy. 
CT colonography may be used for frail patients 
who are unfit for endoscopic colonoscopy. 

Functional disorders 

These are extremely common, particularly in 
younger adults. Diagnosis is based on typical 
clinical features in the absence of apparent 
organic disease. 


Differential diagnosis 

Non ulcer dyspepsia causes symptoms that 
may be indistinguishable from peptic ulcer. UGIE 
and mucosal biopsies are normal. 

IBS causes abdominal pain that is relieved 
by defecation or is associated with a change 
in bowel habit. Diagnostic criteria are shown 
in Box 9.1 , page 90. Symptoms tend to follow 
a relapsing and remitting course, and are 
often exacerbated by psychosocial stress. It is 
essential to rule out other organic causes of these 
symptoms, including inflammatory bowel disease, 
malignancy, coeliac disease and tropical sprue. 

Renal tract disorders 

Infrequent, discrete attacks of severe loin pain 
radiating to the groin ± haematuria suggest renal 
stone disease. Chronic dull, aching or ‘dragging 
discomfort may be due to cancer, adult polycystic 
kidney disease (APKD), loin pain-haematuria 
syndrome or chronic obstruction/pyelonephritis. 
Patients with acute renal colic typically writhe in pain 
and are unable to find a comfortable position (in 
contrast to patients with peritonitis who lie very still). 

~| Gynaecological conditions 

Sudden onset lower abdominal pain in women of 
reproductive age may represent ovarian torsion 
(around a cyst) or ruptured ectopic pregnancy. 
Both are surgical emergencies. Recurrent epi¬ 
sodes of acute lower abdominal pain that regularly 
occur midway through the menstrual cycle may 
be a manifestation of ovulation (mittelschmerz). 
The pain typically occurs suddenly, as the graafian 
follicle ruptures, and subsides over 24 hours. 

An ovarian cancer or cyst may present with 
non-specific persistent lower abdominal discom¬ 
fort ± evidence of a pelvic mass on abdominal/ 
PV examination. 

Endometriosis (endometrial tissue outside the 
uterus) and pelvic inflammatory disease (PID; 
infection of the upper reproductive tract) are 
common causes of chronic lower abdominal 
pain in women of reproductive age. 

Other diagnostic possibilities 

• Constipation. 

• Hypercalcaemia. 

• Small bowel ulcers/tumours. 

• Acute intermittent porphyria. 

• Giardiasis. 

• Abdominal tuberculosis. 

• Coeliac disease. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 









ABDOMINAL PAIN 


Acute abdominal pain: overview 


ABCDE 



Full clinical assessment, FBC, U+E, CRP 



No 


Consider mesenteric ischaemia, Crohn s disease, gastroenteritis, irritable bowel syndrome 
‘medical causes’. Surgical review ± CT abdomen if any concern 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


















































ABDOMINAL PAIN 


31 


Acute abdominal pain: step-by-step assessment 


1 Evidence of shock? 

Rapidly identify patients who are shocked with 
hypotension and evidence of tissue hypoperfu¬ 
sion (see Box 30.1 , p. 267). 

Remember that young, fit patients can often 
maintain BP in the face of major fluid losses; in 
these patients hypotension occurs late, so look 
carefully for early features such as tHR, TRR, 
narrow pulse pressure, anxiety, pallor, cold sweat 
or light-headedness on standing ± postural -iBP. 

If the patient has overt or incipient shock, 
secure two large-bore IV lines; send blood for 
cross-match, U+E, FBC, amylase and LFTs; and 
begin aggressive resuscitation. 

The diagnoses to consider first are rupture of 
an AAA, ectopic pregnancy or other viscus, as 
these may require immediate surgical intervention. 

• Suspect ruptured AAA in any patient with 
known AAA, a pulsatile abdominal mass 
or risk factors, e.g. male >60 years old, 
who experiences sudden-onset, severe 
abdominal/back or loin pain followed rapidly 
by haemodynamic compromise. 

• Suspect ruptured ectopic pregnancy in any 
pregnant woman or woman of child-bearing 
age with recent-onset lower abdominal 
pain or PV bleeding; perform an immediate 
bedside pregnancy test. 

• Consider splenic rupture in any shocked 
patient with abdominal pain who has a 
history of recent trauma, e.g. road traffic 
accident. 

If any of these diagnoses is suspected, arrange 
immediate surgical review prior to imaging. 

In the absence of these conditions perform 
an ECG, CXR, urinalysis and ABG, continue to 
assess for an underlying cause, as described 
below, and refer for urgent surgical review. Other 
important diagnoses to consider include: 

• perforated viscus 

• acute mesenteric ischaemia 

• acute inflammatory conditions, e.g. 
pancreatitis, colitis, cholangitis 

• medical conditions, e.g. diabetic 
ketoacidosis, myocardial infarction, adrenal 
crisis, pneumonia 

• any condition associated with repeated 
vomiting, e.g. intestinal obstruction, 
gastroenteritis. 


2 


Generalized peritonitis? 


Generalized peritonitis is usually the mani¬ 
festation of a perforated hollow viscus with 
inevitable spillage of enteric fluid, e.g stomach, 
duodenum or colon. Suspect it if there is severe, 
non-colicky abdominal pain that is worse on 
movement, coughing or deep inspiration, and 
which is associated with inflammatory features 
and generalized abdominal rigidity. The patient 
will usually be lying still, taking shallow breaths, 
and will be in obvious distress or discomfort; 
reconsider the diagnosis if the patient appears 
well or is moving freely. 

Patients require aggressive resuscitation, 
antibiotics and immediate surgical referral. Free 
air under the diaphragm on erect CXR (present 
in 50-75% of cases) confirms the diagnosis 
(Fig. 4.4); if CXR non-diagnostic consider CT 
with oral and IV contrast. A very high index of 
suspicion is required in the elderly and in patients 
taking systemic steroids; signs are often subtle, 
so reassess frequently. 

Localized peritonitis (or peritonism) occurs 
where the parietal peritoneum is irritated, for 
example by an inflamed appendix or diverticular 
abscess. This results in focal abdominal rigidity 
over the area affected and may precede progres¬ 
sion to generalized peritonitis should the patient’s 
condition deteriorate. 



Fig. 4.4 Free air under the diaphragm 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 








ABDOMINAL PAIN 


Acute abdominal pain: step-by-step assessment 


3 Features of intestinal obstruction? 

Suspect intestinal obstruction if abdominal pain is 
colicky and accompanied by vomiting, absolute 
constipation and/or abdominal distension. The 
predominant symptoms will vary, depending on 
the site of obstruction; in high small bowel obstruc¬ 
tion vomiting and pain are pre-eminent, whereas 
in low colonic lesions constipation and distension 
are more pronounced. If any of these features 
are present, perform an abdominal X-ray (AXR) 
(Fig. 4.5) to confirm the diagnosis and estimate 
the level of the obstruction. 

Examine for an incarcerated hernia in any 
patient with suspected bowel obstruction. 
Consider fu ther imaging and rectal examination 
to confirm an obstructing lesion and differentiate 
from pseudo-obstruction in patients with large 
bowel obstruction. 

Patients may be profoundly dehydrated - 
check U+E, provide adequate fluid resuscitation, 
insert a large-bore nasogastric tube and consider 
a urinary catheter. Refer to surgery for further 
assessment and management. 


4 


Acute and/or bloody diarrhoea? 


Recent onset of acute diarrhoea with cramping 
abdominal pain ± vomiting suggests infective 
gastroenteritis. Suspect colitis (infective, inflam¬ 
matory or ischaemic) if the patient has bloody 
diarrhoea with cramping lower abdominal pain ± 
tenesmus and features of systemic inflammation 
(see Box 4.1). Always consider the possibility 
of ischaemic colitis if the patient is elderly or 
has known vascular disease/atrial fibrillation; if 
ischaemic colitis is suspected, arrange a CT 
mesenteric angiogram. Otherwise, send stool for 
culture and assess as described in Chapter 9. 


5 Unilateral loin or flank pain? 

Suspect renal tract obs ruction (usually due to 
a calculus) if there is severe, colicky loin pain 
(see above) that radiates to the groin ± testes/ 
labia. Patients will typically writhe in pain, unable 
to find a comfortable position (in contrast to 
patients with peritonitis who lie very still). Visible 
(macroscopic) or dipstick (microscopic) haema- 
turia is present in 90% of cases and vomiting is 
common during bouts of pain. 




Very distended Distended low-lying 
caecum transverse colon 


Fig. 4.5 Intestinal obstruction. [A] Small bowel. 

[B] Large bowel. (From Begg JD. Abdominal X-rays Made 
Easy, 2nd edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2006.) 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













ABDOMINAL PAIN 


Acute abdominal pain: step by-step assessment 


Exclude an AAA if the patient is at high risk, 
e.g. male >60 years with vascular disease, or 
if the presentation is atypical, e.g. absence 
of haematuria/restlessness/radiation to groin: 
request an urgent USS and, if this confirms 
the presence of an AAA, arrange immediate 
surgical review. Otherwise, organize non-contrast 
abdominal CT (or IVU if CT is not available) to 
confirm the presence of a stone. 

In patients with a confirmed stone, check renal 
function and look for features of infection proximal 
to the obstruction including TtemperatureA/VBC/ 
CRP or leucocytes/nitrites on urinalysis. If you 
suspect proximal infection, take urine and blood 
cultures, give IV antibiotics and refer urgently 
to urology. 

Suspect pyelonephritis if flank pain is non-colicky 
and associated with inflammatory features (see 
Box 4.1), leucocytes and nitrites (produced by 
bacteria) on urine dipstick, or loin/renal angle 
tenderness ± lower urinary tract symptoms. 
Consider alternative diagnoses, e.g. acute 
cholecystitis, appendicitis, if there is prominent 
abdominal tenderness/guarding or if urinalysis is 
negative for both leucocytes and nitrites. Take 
blood and urine cultures, start IV antibiotics 
and arrange prompt renal USS to exclude a 
perinephric collection or renal obstruction. 


6 


Pain localized to upper or 
lower abdomen? 


The localization of pain within the abdomen 
can be very helpful in narrowing the differential 
diagnosis (see Figs 4.1 and 4.2). 

• If the patient has predominantly RUQ, LUQ, 
epigastric or generalized upper abdominal 
pain, proceed to Acute upper abdominal 
pain (p. 34). 

• If the patient has RIF, LIF, suprapubic or 
bilateral lower abdominal pain, proceed to 
Acute lower abdominal pain (p. 38). 


Consider other causes ± surgical review 
or further imaging if any concern 

Organize CT angiography to look for features 
of mesenteric ischaemia in any patient with 
severe, diffuse pain, shock or unexplained lactic 
acidosis - especially if patients are elderly or have 
vascular disease/atrial fibrillation The abdominal 
examination may be unremarkable until advanced 
stages. 

Consider atypical presentations of common 
disorders such as acute appendicitis or inflam¬ 
matory bowel disease. A retrocaecal appendix 
may present with flank pain while any area of the 
gut may develop a Crohn’s inflammatory mass. 

Bo h gastroenteritis and hypercalcaemia may 
cause abdominal discomfort with conspicuous 
vomiting and minimal abdominal signs - measure 
serum calcium and enquire about infectious 
contacts and recent ingestion of suspicious 
foodstuffs. 

Functional disorders, e.g. IBS are a frequent 
cause of acute abdominal pain. The diagnosis 
of IBS is discussed on page 90, but enquire 
about a background of longstanding intermittent 
abdominal pain with altered bowel habit and 
review the notes for previous similar admissions. 

A period of observation with repeated clinical 
evaluation is very often the key to successful 
diagnosis; for example, abdominal pain that was 
orginally central and non-specific may, on repeat 
examination, have migrated to the RIF, suggest¬ 
ing a diagnosis of acute appendicitis. Patents 
who remain systemically well and whose pain 
appears to be settling can usually be discharged 
safely, with outpatient review. Those with marked 
systemic upset or other features causing concern 
but no clear underlying cause require further 
investigation ± surgical review. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 








ABDOMINAL PAIN 


Acute upper abdominal pain: overview 


Amylase, LFT, erect CXR, ECG 


1 Free air on CXR? 


Yes 

Likely perforated 


hollow viscus 


Urgent surgical review 


No 


2 ECG evidence of ischaemia? 


Yes 


Consider acute coronary syndrome 


No 


3 Amylase >500 U/L? 


Yes 


-► Likely acute pancreatitis - - 


Urgent surgical 


No 



6 


7 


Characteristics of biliary colic? 

Yes 


^ No 



Likely biliary colic 


uss 


Consider acute gastritis, peptic ulcer, gastroenteritis, non-specific abdominal pain 
Observation / surg cal review if any concern 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 




















































ABDOMINAL PAIN 


35 


Acute upper abdominal pain: step-by-step assessment 


1 Free air on CXR? 

Perform an erect CXR in all unwell patients with 
acute upper abdominal pain; the presence of free 
air under the diaphragm (see Fig. 4.4) indicates 
perforation of a hollow viscus. Secure IV access, 
cross-match for blood, resuscitate with IV fluids 
and refer immediately to surgery. 

If the CXR fails to demonstrate free air or 
is equivocal but clinical suspicion is high, e.g. 
sudden-onset severe pain with epigastric tender¬ 
ness and guarding, consider an abdominal CT, 
but first check amylase and ECG as described 
in steps 2 and 3. 


2 


ECG evidence of ischaemia? 


Acute coronary syndromes, particularly inferior 
myocardial infarction (Ml), may present atypically 
with epigastric pain. However, hypotension or 
severe bleeding in patients with acute abdominal 
pathology may provoke or exacerbate ischaemia 
in patients with stable coronary artery disease; in 
these circumstances, administration of powerful 
antithrombotic agents may have catastrophic 
consequences. 

• Perform an ECG in all patients. 

• Refer immediately to cardiology if there are 
features of an ST elevation Ml (see Box 6.1 , 
P-51). 

• In patients with ST depression, evaluate 
carefully for hypotension, sepsis, hypoxia 
and bleeding before attributing changes to 
an acute coronary event. 

• In patients with non-specific T wave 
changes (see Box 6.1 , p. 51), measure 
cardiac biomarkers to assist diagnosis and 
continue to search for alternative causes. 

• Seek cardiology input if there is any 
diagnostic doubt. 


3 


Amylase >500 U/L? 


Measure serum amylase in any patient with acute 
severe epigastric pain. Patients with an amylase 
>3x the reference range are 95% likely to have 
pancreatitis; levels >1000 U/L are considered 
diagnostic. 

If amylase levels are normal or equivocal, 
continue to suspect the diagnosis if the history 
is characteristic and: 

• there has been a delay in presentation OR 

• there is a history of alcoholism - especially 
if the patient has had previous episodes of 
pancreatitis. 

In these patients, consider CT with intravenous 
contrast (provided renal function is satisfactory) 
to look for evidence of pancreatic inflammation 

Once the diagnosis has been made, evalu¬ 
ate repeatedly for evidence of complications, 
e.g. shock, hypoxia (acute respiratory distress 
syndrome, ARDS), disseminated intravascular 
coagulation (DIC); calculate the Glasgow 
prognostic criteria score (Box 4.2) or other 
validated prognostic score; and monitor CRP. 


Box 4.2 Modified Glasgow criteria for 
assessing prognosis in acute pancreatitis 


• Age >55 years 

• Pa0 2 <8 kPa (60 mmHg) 

• WBC >15x10 9 /L 

• Albumin <32 g/L 

• Serum calcium <2.00 mmol/L (8 mg/dL) (corrected) 

• Glucose >10 mmol/L (180 mg/dL) 

• Urea >16 mmol/L (45 mg/dL) (after rehydration) 

• ALT >200 U/L 

• LDH >600 U/L 


’Severity and prognosis worsen as the number of these factors 
increases. More than three implies severe disease. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 














ABDOMINAL PAIN 


Acute upper abdominal pain: step-by-step assessment 


Manage all patients with severe or high-risk acute 
pancreatitis (shock, organ failure, Glasgow score 
>3 or peak CRP >210 mg/L) in a critical care unit. 

Perform an abdominal USS to look for gallstones 
and an MRCP if there is jaundice or a dilated 
common bile duct (CBD) on USS. Rarely, those 
with severe pancreatitis may require urgent ERCP 
and stone extraction. Consider CT after five days 
to assess the extent of pancreatic injury and 
look for evidence of complications, e.g. infection, 
particularly in patients with persistent organ failure 
or a systemic inflammatory response. In cases of 
diagnostic uncertainty, an earlier CT may be helpful. 


4 


Jaundice? 


Organize an urgent abdominal USS for all patients 
with acute upper abdominal pain and jaundice 
to look for evidence of biliary obstruction or 
hepatitis. 

Assume biliary sepsis, at least initially, if the 
patient is unwell with high fever ± rigors or 
cholestatic jaundice (p. 176); give IV antibiotics 
and, if the USS confirms a dilated CBD, refer 
immediately to surgery for further investigation 
(MRCP) and biliary decompression (ERCP). 

Assess as described in Chapter 19 if there 
are clinical or USS features of acute hepatitis. 


5 


Inflammatory response? 


At this stage, use the presence or absence of a 
systemic inflammatory response (see Box 4.1) 
to narrow the differential diagnosis. 

Arrange prompt abdominal USS to confirm or 
exclude acute cholecystitis in any patient with 


inflammatory features accompanied by any of 
the following: 

• localized RUO pain 

• direct tenderness to palpation in the RUO 

• positive Murphy’s sign (sudden arrest 
of inspiration while taking a deep breath 
during palpation of the gallbladder). 

In the absence of acute cholecystitis, the USS 
may reveal an alternative cause for the presenta¬ 
tion, e.g. pyelonephritis, hepatitis, subphrenic 
collection. 

If none of these features is present, consider 
alternative disorders: 

• basal pneumonia if there is clinical or 
CXR evidence of basal consolidation (see 
Figs 12.3 and 12.4, p. 118), especially 

if accompanied by productive cough or 
dyspnoea 

• gastroenteritis in patients with an acute 
vomiting illness and no abdominal guarding 
or rigidity (reassess regularly) 

• acute pyelonephritis if urinalysis is positive 
for leucocytes/nitrites. 

Otherwise, consider USS/CT to exclude 
atypical presentations of acute appendicitis/ 
pancreatitis/cholecystitis, Crohn’s disease or 
other acute inflammatory pathology. 


6 


Characteristics of biliary colic? 


Biliary colic is a common cause of acute severe 
upper abdominal pain in patients who are 
otherwise well and do not exhibit evidence of a 
systemic inflammatory response. Abdominal USS 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 









ABDOMINAL PAIN 


Acute upper abdominal pain: step by-step assessment 


can assist the diagnosis by demonstrating the 
presence of gallstones. However, asymptomatic 
gallstones are very common and so the history 
is critical to making an accurate diagnosis. 
Look for the following suggestive features: 

• onset of pain a few hours after a meal (may 
waken the patient from sleep) 

• duration <6 hours followed by complete 
resolution of symptoms 

• the main site is the epigastrium or RUQ + 
radiation to the back 

• constant, vague, aching or cramping 
discomfort (it is not, strictly speaking, 
‘colicky’) 

• history of previous similar episodes. 

Arrange abdominal USS only in patients with 

a suggestive history. 


7 


Consider other causes ± observation/ 
surgical review if any concern 


Systemically well patients with an acute vomit¬ 
ing illness and recent infectious contact or 


ingestion of suspicious foodstuffs are likely to 
have gastroenteritis. 

Suspect acute gastritis if the patient reports 
new-onset gnawing, burning or vague epigastric 
discomfort ± mild tenderness - especially if this 
is associated with dyspeptic symptoms, e.g. 
nausea, belching, heartburn or a history of recent 
alcohol excess/NSAID use; consider peptic ulcer 
disease if there is a background history of similar 
symptoms. 

In many cases, no definite diagnosis is 
reached. Admit for observation ± surgical review 
if symptoms are not improving or there are wor¬ 
rying features on examination. Otherwise, patients 
can usually be discharged, with further outpatient 
assessment if symptoms recur or persist. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 






ABDOMINAL PAIN 


Acute lower abdominal pain: overview 


Known pregnancy, positive 

Yes Urgent 

Ectopic pregnancy / 

pregnancy test or PV bleeding? 

review 

other cause 


i 


No A _i 


2 


3 


Pain predominantly in RIF? 

No Yes 


Pain migration + RIF tenderness 
+ Twbc / CRP? 

Yes 

Likely appendicitis - 


' 

No 

r 

Yes 


Any of above features? 

Possible appendicitis 



^ No 


^Urgent surgical 
review 


Consider urgent 
*USS/CT 



4 


Suspect acute gynaecological pathology? 


Yes 


Gynaecological 
review 

±uss 


-► 


No 


Acute pelvic inflammatory 
disease, ovarian cyst / 
torsion 


Leucocytes / nitrites on urinalysis? 


Yes 


Likely urinary tract infection 


No 


Consider atypical appendicitis, endometriosis, terminal ileitis, mesenteric adenitis, renal stone 
Observation / surgical review if any concern 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


















































ABDOMINAL PAIN 


39 


Acute lower abdominal pain: step-by-step assessment 


1 


Known pregnancy, positive pregnancy 
test or PV bleeding? 


Perform a bedside pregnancy test in any pre 
or peri-menopausal woman with acute lower 
abdominal pain. If positive or the patient has 
vaginal bleeding, request an urgent gynaecologi¬ 
cal review with transabdominal ± transvaginal USS 
to exclude ectopic pregnancy. If the pregnancy 
test is negative but there is ongoing suspicion of 
pregnancy, e.g. missed period, vaginal bleeding, 
send blood for formal laboratory measurement 
of beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin. 

Request a gynaecological review for assess¬ 
ment of pregnancy-related complications in any 
woman with known intra-uterine pregnancy 
who develops acute lower abdominal pain, but 
consider alternative diagnoses, including acute 
appendicitis. 


An TWBC and tCRP are not specific for 
appendicitis but the diagnosis is unlikely if 
both are within normal limits. Nevertheless, a 
surgical review is mandatory if the presentation 
is otherwise typical - especially if <12 hours from 
onset of symptoms. 

Maintain a high index of suspicion for appen¬ 
dicitis in any patient with RLQ pain. Request 
prompt surgical review and consider urgent 
imaging to assist diagnosis if pain is accompa¬ 
nied by either of the two clinical features listed 
above or an TWBC/TCRP. 

Abdominal USS may help to confirm the 
diagnosis rapidly or, in females, identify pelvic 
pathology, e.g. ovarian cyst/torsion. 

CT offers greater diagnostic accuracy and 
may be considered in males or if diagnostic 
uncertainty persists after USS. 





LLQ pain, tenderness + inflammatory 

2 

Pain predominantly in RIF? 

3 

response? 


The two most helpful clinical characteristics of 
acute appendicitis are: 

• migration of pain from the periumbilical 
region to the RLQ 

• RLQ tenderness or signs of local 
peritonism. 

In the absence of previous appendectomy, 
acute appendicitis is highly likely if both of these 
features are present, alongside mild fever or an 
TWBC or TCRP. In these circumstances, imaging 
is unlikely to contribute to the diagnosis and 
patients should be referred immediately to the 
on-call surgeon. 


Exclude sigmoid diverticulitis in any patient with 
acute LLQ pain and tenderness (± guarding) 
with evidence of systemic inflammation (see 
Box 4.1) - especially if >40 years. Even in the 
absence of overt tenderness or inflammatory 
features, maintain a high degree of suspicion 
if the patient is elderly or has known diverticular 
disease. Arrange urgent CT to confirm the 
diagnosis and identify complications, e.g. 
abscess, or to seek an alternative cause for 
the presentation. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










ABDOMINAL PAIN 


Acute lower abdominal pain: step-by-step assessment 


4 


Suspect acute gynaecological pathology? 


Have a high index of suspicion for acute 
gynaecological pathology in any woman of 
child-bearing age with acute pelvic or lower 
abdominal pain. 

Organize an urgent USS if there is a history of 
abrupt-onset, severe, unilateral pelvic or lower 
abdominal pain with any of the following features: 

• associated nausea and vomiting 

• unilateral tenderness 

• adnexal tenderness or palpable adnexal 
mass 

• age <35 years. 


The principal aim of USS is to look for evidence 
of ovarian torsion but it may reveal an alternative 
diagnosis, e.g. ovarian cyst. Request a gynaecol¬ 
ogy review if you have a strong clinical suspicion 
of torsion or the USS result is equivocal. 

In the absence of features suggesting ovarian 
torsion, consider acute pelvic inflammatory 
disease (PID). Suspect the diagnosis if there is 
bilateral lower abdominal pain and tenderness 
± fever associated with any of the following 
features: 


• abnormal vaginal or cervical discharge 

• tenderness on moving the cervix during 
bimanual vaginal examination (‘cervical 
excitation’) 


• adnexal tenderness on bimanual vaginal 

examination. 

The diagnosis is often one of exclusion 
and, in the emergency setting, it is prudent to 
seek formal gynaecological input; in difficult 
cases, diagnostic laparoscopy may be required. 
Whenever the diagnosis is considered, take 
endocervical swabs for chlamydia and gonor¬ 
rhoea, and treat in all cases if positive. 


5 


Leucocytes/nitrites on urinalysis? 


Suprapubic pain/tenderness is common in UTI 
but the absence of nitrites and leucocytes on 
urinalysis makes the diagnosis unlikely. 

Acute appendicitis may cause dysuria, fre¬ 
quency and urgency with positive urinalysis, e g. 
haematuria, leucocytes, if the inflamed appendix 
lies adjacent to the bladder or ureter always 
consider this possibility, particularly in males (in 
whom cystitis is rare). However, in the absence 
of other worrying features, a positive urinalysis 
for both leucocytes and nitrites, especially in 
women, suggests UTI; send an MSU and start 
empirical treatment. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 







ABDOMINAL PAIN 


Acute lower abdominal pain: step by-step assessment 


6 


Consider other causes ± observation/ 
surgical review if any concern 


Consider atypical presentations of appendicitis 
resulting from variations in the position of the 
appendix; for example, an inflamed appendix that 
lies within the pelvis may only be tender on rectal 
examination. Alternative diagnoses in patients 
with inflammatory features include terminal ileitis 
and mesenteric adenitis. Seek a formal surgical 
opinion if the diagnosis is uncertain. 

Consider mesenteric ischaemia in any patient 
who appears unwell or has an unexplained lactic 
acidosis - especially if they have known vascular 
disease or atria fibrillation. 

An obstructed renal stone most commonly 
presents with loin pain but, once descended 
to the ureter, may cause more localized tender¬ 
ness in the RLQ or LLQ; suspect this if the pain 


radiates to the testes/labia or is associated with 
visible/dipstick haematuria. 

The diagnosis of acute urinary retention is 
usually obvious but should be excluded in con¬ 
fused patients with lower abdominal tenderness 
and distress. Clinical examination should be 
diagnostic but a bladder scan may be helpful. 

In female patients, consider the possibility of 
alternative pelvic pathology, e.g. endometriosis 
or mittelschmerz (recurrent episodes of lower 
abdominal pain that regularly occur midway 
through the menstrual cycle), especially if there 
is a background of previous similar episodes at 
the midpoint of their menstrual cycle. 

In many patients, a precise diagnosis remains 
elusve and, as with upper and generalized 
abdominal pain, functional disorders are a 
common cause. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 






ABDOMINAL PAIN 


Chronic/relapsing abdominal pain: overview 


Full clinical assessment, PR exam, FBC, LFTs, ESR, CRP, Ca 2+ , coellac serology 


Upper Gl symptoms with 
alarm features? 


No 


Lower Gl symptoms with 
alarm features? 


No 


Yes 


UGIE 


Peptic ulcer disease, 
gastric cancer, gastritis 


Yes 


-► Colonoscopy - - - ► Colon cancer, colitis 


Jaundice, abnormal LFTs, hepatomegaly, 

Yes 

Hepatobiliary cancer, biliary 

ascites or typical history of biliary colic? 

USS 

colic, (or other diagnosis) 


No ^_ 








Renal cancer, stone d sease, 

Loin pain + mass or haematuria? 


—-► Renal USS -► 

adult polycystic kidney 




(±CT) 

disease 


No 


5 


6 


Cyclical pain, pelvic mass, dyspareunla 

Yes 

or abnormal PV bleeding / discharge? 


1 

No 

' 


Palpable mass, weight loss, systemic 

Yes 

upset or unexplained jaundice? 



Consider pelvic malignancy, 
endometriosis, pelvic inflammatory 
disease 


Abdominal ---► 
CT 


Cancer, Crohn’s disease, 
chronic pancreatitis 
(or other diagnosis) 



7 


Clinical or laboratory features 

Yes 

suggesting organic disease? 



No 


Further investigation ± refer Gl 


Likely functional disorder, e.g. irritable bowel syndrome 

Reassess or refer Gl / gynaecology if persistent troublesome symptoms / organic features 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
























































ABDOMINAL PAIN 


Chronic/relapsing abdominal pain: step-by-step assessment 


1 Upper Gl symptoms with alarm features? 

Arrange prompt UGIE if there is upper abdominal 
discomfort ± other dyspeptic symptoms with 
any of the following: 

• weight loss 

• dysphagia 

• persistent vomiting or early satiety 

• abdominal distension 

• haematemesis or iron deficiency 
anaemia 

• >55 years with new-onset persistent 
symptoms. 

If a gastric ulcer is identified, ensure that a 
biopsy is sent to exclude malignancy, prescribe 
H. pylori eradication therapy if the CLO test is 
positive recheck the history for NSAID use, and 
consider an interval UGIE to ensure satisfactory 
healing. 

Eradicate H. pylori in any patient with a duo¬ 
denal ulcer and confirm successful eradication 
with a urea breath test. 

In patients with macroscopic appearances of 
an upper Gl tumour, obtain the formal biopsy 
result and consider a staging CT scan. 


Lower Gl symptoms with alarm features? 


Arrange urgent lower Gl endoscopy in any 
patient with: 

• rectal bleeding 

• a palpable rectal mass 

• iron deficiency anaemia 

• change in bowel habit and >45 years or 
recent weight loss. 

Consider flexible sigmoidoscopy as the first-line 
investigation in patients <45 years, colonoscopy 
if >45 years. Obtain the biopsy results of any 
suspicious lesions or sections of Gl mucosa. 


Jaundice, abnormal LFTs, hepatomegaly, 
ascites or typical history of biliary colic? 


The combination of new-onset jaundice and 
persistent/recurrent abdominal discomfort 
suggests hepatitis, choledocholithiasis or, most 
frequently, malignancy, e.g. biliary, ampullary, 
pancreatic or hepatocellular cancer or hepatic 
metastases. USS may reveal the cause but, if 
inconclusive, further investigation, e.g. CT or 
MRCP, is mandatory. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 









ABDOMINAL PAIN 


Chronic/relapsing abdominal pain: step-by-step assessment 


Arrange USS and perform a diagnostic ascitic 
tap in any patient with ascites (send for biochem¬ 
istry microbiology and cytology). If the ascites is 
exudative and USS fails to reveal an underlying 
cause, organize an abdominal CT scan. 

The features of biliary colic are described 
above. If present, arrange USS to look for 
gallstones. Note that gallstones are a very 
frequent finding in asymptomatic patients so, 
unless the history is typical or there is evidence 
of a complication, e.g. dilated CBD, chronic 
cholecystitis, they are unlikely to explain the 
presentation. 

Refer to a Gl specialist if there is a convincing 
history of biliary pain in the absence of gallstones, 
especially if associated with abnormal LFTs or 
a dilated CBD. 


4 


Loin pain + mass or haematuria? 


You must exclude upper renal tract cancer in 
any patient presenting with persistent oin pain 
associated with a mass or haematuria (visible or 
dipstick). Renal USS is a first-line investigation 
and may reveal alternative causes, e.g. APKD or 
chronic hydronephrosis. Consider CT ± urology 
referral if the cause remains unclear, especially 
in patients >40 years. 


5 


Cyclical pain, pelvic mass, dyspareunia or 
abnormal PV bleeding/discharge? 


Organize a pelvic USS in any patient with a 
pelvic mass or any postmenopausal patient 
with PV bleeding or recent-onset, persistent 


lower abdominal pain. The features of PID are 
described above; if present, take endocervical 
or vaginal swabs for gonorrhoea and chlamydia 
- treat if positive. 

Consider endometriosis in any woman of 
reproductive age with severe dysmenorrhoea, 
or chronic lower abdominal pain and any of the 
following features: 

• variation with menstrual cycle 

• deep dyspareunia 

• other prominent cyclical or perimenstrual 
symptoms. 

Establishing a definitive diagnosis of endome¬ 
triosis may be challenging - refer to a gynaecolo¬ 
gist for further assessment, e.g. laparoscopy if 
symptoms are severe. 


6 


Palpable mass, weight loss, systemic 
upset or unexplained jaundice? 


At this stage, organize an abdominal CT if the 
patient has any of the above features. Patients 
with a palpable mass may have been investigated 
with other modalities in steps 1-5 above but CT 
is more likely to identify certain masses, e.g. 
pancreas, small bowel, renal tract and omental, 
and should be performed if the cause remains 
uncertain. In patients with abdominal pain and 
significant weight loss or other major constitu¬ 
tional upset, e.g. fevers, night sweats or TTESR, 
CT may reveal evidence of lymphoma, solid organ 
malignancy or inflammatory disease, e.g. chronic 
pancreatitis, abscess, Crohn’s disease 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










ABDOMINAL PAIN 


Chronic/relapsing abdominal pain: step by-step assessment 


Clinical or laboratory features suggest 
organic disease? 

Further investigation is usually required if the 
patient is >45 years with recent-onset symptoms, 
weight loss, constitutional upset or abnormal 
screening investigations. Important organic 
causes of pain that may easily be missed 
include chronic pancreatitis, chronic mesenteric 
ischaemia and Crohn’s disease. 

Consider chronic pancreatitis in any patient 
with a background of chronic alcohol excess or 
steatorrhoea. Check faecal elastase, perform an 
abdominal CT and consider specialist referral for 
further assessment. 

Exclude mesenteric ischaemia (CT mesenteric 
angiography) if there is a close relationship 
between eating and the onset of pain, especially 


if evidence of vascular disease elsewhere, e.g. 
angina, intermittent claudication. 

Assess any patient with associated diarrhoea 
Even in the absence of diarrhoea, consider further 
investigation for small bowel Crohn’s disease, 
e.g. enteroscopy, barium follow-through or small 
bowel MRI in a young patient with unexplained 
mouth ulcers, TESR/CRP, extraintestinal mani¬ 
festations (see Box 9.3, p. 91) or persistent RLQ 
tenderness. 

If none of the above is present, a functional 
cause, e.g. IBS is likely - particularly when typical 
symptoms are present (see Box 9.1, p. 90). 
However, patients with persistent, troublesome 
symptoms may require specialist assessment 
and investigation to exclude organic disease 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 






Breast lump 



Breast lump is the most common presenting 
feature of breast cancer. All breast lumps must 
be referred to a specialist breast service for 
evaluation by triple assessment, comprising 
clinical, radiological and pathological evaluation. 
The majority of referrals to breast services are 
benign. Results of malignant lumps should be 
managed in a multidisciplinary team setting. 

USS is the imaging modality of choice in 
women <35 years due to the high density 
of breast tissue. MRI scanning is suitable for 
selected patients. Older women should have 
mammography ± USS. Pathological assess¬ 
ment is undertaken by ultrasound-guided core 
biopsy, fine needle aspiration (for cystic lesions) 
or occasionally excision biopsy. 

Breast cancer 

The breast is the most common site of cancer in 
women; 1 in 9 women in the UK are affected by 
breast cancer in their lifetime. The risk increases 
with age and the mean age at diagnosis is 60 
years. Risk factors are shown in Box 5.1. Features 
of a breast lump that suggest cancer are shown 
in Box 5.2. However, it is not possible to exclude 
cancer by clinical examination alone and all palpable 
masses should be regarded as potentially malignant 
until proven otherwise. 


Box 5.1 Risk factors for breast cancer 


• Previous breast cancer 

• Increasing age 

• Family history 

• Oral contraceptive pill 

• Hormone replacement therapy 

• Ea ly menarche 

• Late menopause 

• Nulliparity 

• First pregnancy >35 years 

• Current smoker 


Breast abscess 

The lump usually develops rapidly and is tender. 
There is often overlying erythema; there may be 
fever and evidence of a systemic inflammatory 
response 

In lactating women, breast abscesses occur 
most frequently in the first 12 weeks post-partum; 
painful, cracked nipples are common. It may be 
difficult to distinguish an abscess if breast tissue 
is grossly indurated due to mastitis; in these cases 
referral should be made for further assessment 
and ultrasound imaging. 

In non-lactating women, abscesses are 
uncommon and an underlying inflamma¬ 
tory cancer should be excluded. Subareolar 
abscesses are the most common form, typically 
associated with a periductal mastitis; there is a 
strong association with smoking. 

Fibroadenoma 

Fibroadenoma is a common benign neoplasm 
that occurs after puberty in younger women 
usually <30 years. It typically presents as a 
discrete, mobile, non-tender mass with a rubbery 
consistency. The diagnosis should be confirmed 
by triple assessment. 

Fibrocystic change 

Fibrocystic change is a benign condition associated 
with tender, lumpy breasts that may affect up to 
50% of women between 20 and 50 years but is 


Box 5.2 Suspicious features of breast lump 


• Hardness 

• Immobility 

• Skin tethering/puckering 

• Skin changes (peau d'orange, eczema) 

• Nipple retraction 

• Lymphadenopathy 

• Bloody nipple discharge 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



















BREAST LUMP 


Differential diagnosis 


rare after menopause. Features often vary over 
the course of the menstrual cycle due to hormone 
fluctuations. Areas of firm, lumpy breast tissue 
without a discrete mass are often termed nodular 
breast tissue; if this is localized or asymmetrical and 
persists throughout the cycle, referral should be 
made to exclude underlying cancer. Breast cysts 
are firm, smooth, well-defined lumps which may 
cause discomfort if enlarging. USS confirms their 
cystic nature. If needle aspiration yields bloody fluid, 
this should be sent for cytological examination. 

Fat necrosis 

Fat necrosis is a benign condition that arises 
after trauma or surgery. It may present as a firm, 
irregular mass with tethering to overlying skin, 
making it difficult to distinguish from malignancy. 
Irrespective of recent trauma, all lumps with 
suspicious features should be regarded as 
potentially malignant and evaluated urgently by 
triple assessment. 

Other causes 

Skin and subcutaneous lesions, such as epi¬ 
dermoid cysts and lipomata, may occur on the 
breast. Phylioides tumours are rare and share 
many clinical features with fibroadenomas but 
are typically more aggressive; metastasis is 
rare but can occur. Superficial thrombophlebitis 
(spontaneous thrombosis of superficial breast 
veins) presents with palpable, erythematous linear 


nodules, and resolves over weeks. Galactocoele 
is a rare cystic lesion of the breast. It contains 
milk and most commonly occurs in lactating 
women; occurrence in non-lactating women 
requires further endocrine investigation. 


Nipple lesions 

These must be investigated (triple assessment) 
to rule out an underlying cancer. Causes include 
Paget’s disease of the nipple (95% association 
with cancer), nipple adenoma, eczema of the 
nipple, basal cell carcinoma, melanoma and 
Bowen's disease. 


5 


Male breast disease 

Breast lumps in men are rare. Gynaecomastia 
most commonly presents as a rubbery button 
of tissue, concentric to the areola. It occurs 
frequently at puberty and necessitates careful 
testicular examination and assessment of sexual 
development. Around 25% are idiopathic. Other 
causes include drugs (-20%), e.g. spironolac¬ 
tone, anabolic steroids, liver cirrhosis (decreased 
metabolism of oestrogen, <10%), gonadal failure 
(decreased androgens, <10%) and testicular 
tumours (increased oestrogen production, 
-3%). Male breast cancer (1% of all breast 
cancers) typically presents as a hard, fixed lesion, 
sometimes with overlying skin involvement, and 
is usually eccentric to the areola. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 












BREAST LUMP 


Overview 


Full clinical assessment + breast examination 


1 


Discrete lump palpable? 



Asymmetrical or localised 
nodularity? 


Yes 


No t 


Re-examine and consider breast imaging. 


Refer for triple assessment if 
patient >35 years or lump persists 
after menstruation 


Yes 


2 


Evidence of abscess? 


Yes 

-► 


Refer to on-call breast specialist 


3 


Features of/risk factors for 

Yes 

breast cancer? 



No 



r 



Refer urgently for triple assessment 


Refer for triple assessment 



Fig. 5.1 Positions for inspecting the breast. [A] Hands pressed into hips. [B] Hands above head.il] Leaning forward. 
(From Ford MJ, Hennessey I, Japp A. Introduction to Clinical Examination, 8th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2005.) 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

































BREAST LUMP 


49 


Step-by-step assessment 


1 Discrete lump palpable? 

If you are unable to locate a lump, ask the patient 
to attempt to find it and examine in different 
positions, e.g. supine and upright. In the absence 
of a discrete lump, assess carefully for nodularity. 

Refer any patient >35 years old with a localized 
area of nodularity or discrete lump for urgent triple 
assessment. If the patient is <35 years, refer 
for triple assessment if the localized nodularity 
persists at review after menstruation. 

If no lump or nodularity is detected, consider 
ultrasound or mammography as appropriate to 
exclude underlying impalpable pathology. 


Evidence of abscess? 


Suspect breast infection if there is an acute, 
painful swelling with overlying erythema, fever or 
a systemic inflammatory response; start antibiotic 
treatment and refer as an emergency to the 


breast/surgical team. Refer to a breast specialist 
to exclude an abscess in any breast-feeding 
woman with gross mastitis and induration 


3 


Features of/risk factors for 
breast cancer? 


Refer any patient with a palpable breast lump 
for specialist triple assessment to exclude breast 
cancer. 

Request urgent review if: 

• patient has risk factors for breast cancer 
(Box 5.1) 

• lump is rapidly enlarging 

• lump has features of breast cancer (Box 
5.2) 

• patient >30 years with a new discrete lump 

• patient <30 years with a major risk factor, 
e.g. personal or family history of breast 
cancer. 


5 


Clinical tool 

Breast examination 


• Obtain consent and offer a chaperone; ensure privacy 
and a warm room. 

• Enquire whether the patient has noticed any breast 
lumps and ask her to point them out. 

• With the patient sitting comfortably, hands resting on 
the thighs, inspect for asymmetry, local swelling, skin 
changes, e.g. dimpling, redness and nipple inversion or 
discharge. 

• Repeat the inspection (Fig. 5.1) with the patient's 
hands pressed against her hips (contracting the 
pectoral muscles), raised above her head (stretching 
the pectoral muscles) and sitting forward with the 
breasts dependent. 

• With the patient supine, and hands under the head, 
palpate each breast: compress the breast tissue 


against the chest wall using the palmar surface of the 
fingers held flat on the surface of the breast. Palpate 
clockwise to cover all of the breast tissue, including 
under the nipple. 

• Record the size, position, attachments, mobility, 

su face, edge and consistency of any lumps and look 
for associated signs of inflammation (tenderness, 
warmth, redness). 

• Palpate for axillary lymph nodes. Ask the patient to sit 
facing you and support the full weight of her arm at the 
wrist with your opposite hand. After warning of possible 
discomfort, use your other hand to palpate all around 
the axilla, compressing its contents against the chest 
wall. Repeat on the other side. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
















Q Chest pain 


Chest pain is one of the most common presenta¬ 
tions encountered in both emergency medicine 
and medical outpatient clinics. The diagnostic 
approach to acute chest pain is different from 
that of intermittent chest pain and they should 
be considered as distinct clinical entities. 


Acute chest pain 


The primary aim is to identify acute coronary 
syndromes (ACSs) and other life-threatening 
causes, such as aortic dissection and pulmonary 
embolism (PE). ECG analysis, CXR and biomark¬ 
ers, e.g. troponin, D-dimer, play a central role 
in evaluation and are intimately linked with the 
clinical assessment. Pleuritic chest pain has a 
sharp or stabbing character and varies with 
respiration (worse on inspiration); it should be 
differentiated from non-pleuritic pain at an early 
stage, as it suggests a different range of possible 
diagnoses 

Acute coronary syndromes 

Acute thrombus formation in a ruptured or eroded 
atheromatous coronary artery plaque causes an 
ACS. Sudden total occlusion of a major vessel 
causes ischaemia of a full-thickness segment 
of myocardium resulting in acute ST elevation 
myocardial infarction (STEMI). The mainstay of 
treatment in these patients is immediate reperfu¬ 
sion by primary angioplasty or fibrinolytic therapy. 

With incomplete occlusion or a good collateral 
blood supply there is less extensive ischaemia, 
which is usually associated with a degree of 
cardiomyocyte necrosis (non-ST elevation 
myocardial infarction; NSTEMI). Less frequently, 
myocardial ischaemia can occur without cell 
loss (unstable angina). The introduction of 
high-sensitivity cardiac troponin measurements 
(with gender-specific cut-offs) has resulted in an 
increase in the detection of Ml (~4% absolute 


and 20% relative increase) and a decrease in 
the diagnosis of unstable angina. 

Unstable angina or NSTEMI may also occur 
in the absence of acute plaque rupture if hypox- 
aemia, anaemia, tachyarrhythmia or hypotension 
is superimposed upon stable coronary artery 
disease (CAD). 

The pain of myocardial ischaemia is desc ibed 
below (see ‘angina pectoris’). 

• In unstable angina, the pain: 

• is of new onset and severe 

• occurs at rest or 

• occurs with increasing frequency, 
duration or intensity. 

• In STEMI, the pain is typically severe, 
with an abrupt onset, and is persistent, 
unrelieved by glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) 
spray and accompanied by autonomic 
upset (sweating, nausea and vomiting). 

• The presentation of NSTEMI may lie 
anywhere between these two extremes; it 
is distinguished from unstable angina by 
biochemical evidence of infarction 
(Ttroponin), and from STEMI by ECG 
features (Boxes 6.1 and 6.2). 

• Certain groups of patients, e g elderly or 
diabetic, may have no or minimal pain. 

Aortic dissection 

This is a tear in the wall of the aorta. It typically 
causes sudden onset, intense, unrelenting chest 
pain that radiates to the back, between the 
shoulder blades (this may be the main site of 
pain). The character of the pain is often described 
as ‘ripping’, ‘tearing’ or, most frequently, ‘sharp’. 
Autonomic upset is common; syncope or focal 
neurological deficit may occur. Mortality is high 
(1 % per hour in the initial phase). Aortic dissection 
must be suspected in any patient presenting 
with coexisting cardiovascular and neurological 
symptoms or signs. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 








CHEST PAIN 


Differential diagnosis 


Box 6.1 ECG abnormalities in acute 
coronary syndromes 


ECG abnormalities in STEMI 

1 >1 mm ST elevation in at least 2 adjacent limb 
leads, e.g. II and III; I and aVL OR 

2. >2 mm ST elevation in at least 2 adjacent 
praecordial leads, e.g. V 2 and V 3 ; V 5 and V 6 OR 

3. Left bundle branch block of new onset 

Major ischaemic ECG changes (strongly suggestive 

of myocardial ischaemia) 

1. ST changes that vary with onset and offset of pain 
('dynamic’ changes) 

2. >1 mm horizontal ST depression in >2 adjacent 
leads 

3. Deep symmetrical T wave inversion 

Minor ischaemic ECG changes (less specific for 

myocardial ischaemia) 

1 <1 mm horizontal ST depression 

2 New or evolving T wave inversion or flattening 


Pulmonary embolism 

Pain due to PE depends on the site and size of 
the embolism. Small emboli commonly produce 
pleuritic symptoms due to distal pulmonary infarc¬ 
tion and may produce few other clinical signs; 
large emboli may produce severe, sudden-onset, 
central chest pain that mimics Ml due to central 
pulmonary occlusion. Most patients with large 
embol are dyspnoeic and have other features 
such as haemoptysis, syncope or shock. The 
majority of emboli arise from lower limb deep 
vein thrombosis (DVT), but clinical features of 
DVT are inconsistent and often absent 

Acute pericarditis 

This typically causes constant retrosternal pain 
with a sharp, stabbing character that may radiate 
to the shoulders, arm or trapezius ridge. It is 
usually more localized than ischaemic pain and 
may be accompanied by a rub on auscultation. 
Pain is often, but not invariably, worsened by 
inspiration lying down, with movement or during 
swallowing, and eased by sitting forward. 

Gastro-oesophageal disorders 

Oesophageal spasm can cause severe 
retrosternal discomfort that mimics cardiac 
pain. Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) 


Box 6.2 Universal definition of 
myocardial infarction 


Outside the context of sudden death, percutaneous 
coronary intervention or coronary surgery, acute 
myocardial infarction (Ml) should be used when there 
is evidence of myocardial necrosis in a clinical setting 
consistent with acute myocardial ischaemia. Under these 
conditions any one of the following criteria meets the 
diagnosis for Ml. 

• Detection of a rise and/or fall of cardiac biomarker 
values (preferably cardiac troponin [cTnj) with at least 
one value above the 99th percentile upper reference 
limit (URL) and wth at least one of the following; 
symptoms of ischemia 

new or presumed new significant ST-segment-T 
wave (ST—T) changes or new left bundle branch 
block (LBBB) 

development of pathological Q waves in the ECG 
imaging evidence of new loss of viable 
myocardium or new regional wall motion 
abnormality 

identification of an intracoronary thrombus by 
angiography or autopsy. 


Source: Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS et al. 2012. Universal 
definition of myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J. 33:2551-2567. 


6 


usually presents with ‘heartburn’: a hot or burning 
retrosternal discomfort that radiates upwards; 
some patients experience severe episodes of 
pain that mimic cardiac pain, possibly due to 
reflux-induced spasm. Important clues include 
onset after eating, aggravation of symptoms 
by lying supine or bending over, and, often, 
a history of recent weight gain Oesophageal 
rupture is often diagnosed late and carries a 
high mortality. It should be suspected in any 
patient who develops chest pain after vomiting. 

Pneumothorax 

Pneumothorax causes unilateral, sudden-onset 
pleuritic chest pain, often associated with 
breathlessness. In large pneumothoraces there 
may be ibreath sounds and hyper-resonance 
to percussion. Diagnosis is usually confirmed 
on CXR. 

Pneumonia 

This may cause pleuritic pain, usually accom¬ 
panied by other clinical features such as fever, 
cough, purulent sputum and breathlessness. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
























CHEST PAIN 


Differential diagnosis 


Musculoskeletal problems 

A common cause of chest discomfort with a wide 
variety of presentations. The pain often varies with 
posture or movement, and may be reproduced 
or exacerbated by local palpation. Rib fracture 
typically causes severe pain following trauma but 
most cases are due to minor soft tissue injuries. 
Even these can be symptomatic for up to 6 
weeks. Malignant chest wall invasion produces 
constant, unremitting, localized pain that is not 
related to respiration and may disturb sleep. 

Anxiety 

A common cause of chest pain. Occasionally, 
presentations are dramatic, with patients report¬ 
ing intense symptoms. Associated features may 
include breathlessness with ‘inability to take 
enough air’ and tingling around the mouth; the 
onset of symptoms may coincide with stressful 
situations or emotional distress. 

Other causes 

• Intrathoracic malignancy or connective 
tissue disorders, e.g. systemic lupus 
erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, may 
involve the pleura and present with pleuritic 
pain ± pleural effusion. 

• Subdiaphragmatic inflammatory pathology, 
e.g. abscess, can mimic pneumonia 
(pleuritic pain, fever, small pleural effusion). 

• Mediastinal masses, e.g. thymoma or 
lymphoma, tend to cause a dull, 
constant, progressive retrosternal pain that 
disturbs sleep. 

• Herpes zoster may cause severe pain, 
sometimes preceded by tingling or burning, 
followed by development of a vesicular 
rash in a dermatomal distribution. The rash 
has often not manifested at the time of 
presentation, making diagnosis difficult. 



Angina is the symptomatic manifestation of 
myocardial ischaemia. It tends to be perceived as 
a diffuse retrosternal discomfort that may radiate 
to the left (or right) shoulder/arm, throat, jaw or 
back. Typical descriptions include ‘tightness’, 


Box 6.3 Estimating the likelihood of coronary 
artery disease 


High risk 

• Previously documented CAD or other vascular 
disease, e.g. stroke, peripheral arterial disease 

• Male >60 years OR >50 years with >2 risk factors 
OR >40 years with >3 risk factors 

• Female >60 years with >3 risk factors 

Moderate risk 

• All patients not in high-risk or low-risk group 
Low risk 

• Age <30 years 

• Female <40 years with no risk factors 

’Risk factors: cigarette smoking, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, 
hypercholesterolemia (total cholesterol >6.5 mmol/L), family 
h story of premature CAD. 


‘pressure’ and ‘heaviness’ but many others, e.g. 
‘burning’ are recognized. Many patients do not 
perceive angina as painful but most feel a sense 
of ‘discomfort’ - if you only ask about ‘pain’, 
you may miss the diagnosis. 

Stable angina is almost always due to ath¬ 
erosclerotic narrowing in one or more coronary 
arteries. In considering the likelihood of angina, it 
is therefore important to consider the underlying 
risk of CAD (Box 6.3). Myocardial blood flow 
is adequate under resting conditions but is 
insufficient to meet metabolic demands during 
periods of increased cardiac work. Consequently, 
episodes of angina tend to be precipitated by a 
predictable degree of exertion and rapidly relieved 
by rest and/or GTN spray, with episodes typically 
lasting <10 minutes. Less commonly, angina 
may result from tachyarrhythmias (especially on 
a background of significant coronary narrowing) 
or transient coronary artery spasm. 

Gastro-oesophageal disorders 

Gastro-oesophageal reflux typically causes a 
hot, burning retrosternal discomfort which radi¬ 
ates upwards; it is often provoked by bending 
or lying flat, e.g. in bed, and there may be a 
relationship with food. Symptoms are relieved 
by antacids. Oesophageal spasm can cause 
severe retrosternal discomfort that closely 
mimics cardiac pain and may be worsened by 
exertion and relieved by nitrates. There is often 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





















Differential diagnosis 


53 


an associated history of dysphagia, dyspepsia 
or typical heartburn. 

Musculoskeletal disorders 

These are a common cause of chest discomfort 
with a wide variety of presentations; most are 
due to minor soft tissue injuries. The pain typi¬ 
cally varies with posture or movement and may 
respond to NSAIDs. In costochondritis, there is 
well-localized tenderness of the costochondral 
junctions that is exacerbated by local pressure. 

Asthma 

Patients with asthma may describe exertional 
chest ‘tightness’ on account of bronchospasm, 
which may be difficult to distinguish from angina. 
There is usually an associated history of wheeze, 


breathlessness and cough, and precipitants other 
than exertion may be apparent, e.g. common 
allergens, viral upper RTI. 

Anxiety 

Emotional distress is a very common cause of 
chest pain and many suspected angina attacks 
are actually ‘panic attacks’. Presentations are 
often quite dramatic, with patients reporting 
throat tightness, a ‘choking’ sensation and/or 
difficulty taking a breath. There may be evidence 
of hyperventilation with tingling around the mouth 
and extremities and iPaC0 2 on ABG. Episodes 
tend to arise in the context of stress rather than 
exertion. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










CHEST PAIN 


Clinical tool: the ECG in acute chest pain 


Clinical tool 

ECG abnormalities in chest pain 


The ECG in STEMI 

Acute transmural ischaemia produces ST elevation in leads 
that ‘look at’ the affected region of myocardium: 

• in anterior Ml (Fig. 6.1), V 2 -V 5 

• in lateral Ml, V 5 , V 6 ,1 and aVL 

• in inferior Ml (Fig. 6.2), II, III and aVF. 

There may be associated ST depression in the opposing 
leads ('reciprocal change’). Posterior Ml (Fig. 6.3) is 


recognized by reciprocal anterior ST depression and a 
dominant R wave (reciprocal Q wave) in V,. Further ECG 
changes occur as the infarct progresses (Fig. 6 4): loss of 
the R wave, followed by development of Q waves and T 
wave inversion (TWI). ST segments typically return to 
baseline; persistent ST elevation may indicate the 
development of a left ventricular aneurysm. Extensive 
anteroseptal infarction may cause new left bundle branch 
block (Fig. 6.5) rather than ST elevation. 



Fig. 6.1 Acute anterior ST elevation myocardial infarction. (From Douglas G, Nicol F Robertson C. Macleod’s Clinical 
Examination, 12th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2009.) 


pl 1 1 1 

VR 

, Vl i 

V4 1 I 

T-l, 4..- 

1 j 



n 

VL 

jA-.-.A-V- 

v 2 , 

V<= j i 




hi 

VF 

v 3 

v 6 

i n A A A 

■1 " ’ 


fgrr^ 

— .jL-i 


Fig. 6.2 Acute inferior ST elevation myocardial infarction. (From Hampton JR. The ECG in Practice, 5th edn. Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone, 2008.) 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













































































































































































CHEST PAIN 


Clinical tool: the ECG in acute chest pain 


Clinical tool—cont’d 

ECG abnormalities in chest pain 



Fig. 6.3 Acute inferoposterior ST elevation myocardial infarction. (From Grubb NR, Newby DE. Churchill’s Pocketbooks 
Cardi logy, 2nd edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2006.) 


—hi ini 

i 

aVR r 


— 7 2r 


! l l 

It ^ 

HI 

-aVL F 

IT” v 2 1P 

1 

nr 

4 K- 

IBB 

hi 

mi 

aVF 

-.4-. 

v 3 1 



Fig. 6.4 Evolving anterior ST elevation myocardial infarction. 



1 

~aVfty 4 

iiliil 

pj~ 

-4- 4- 

mm 

ii 

i L 

"aVL 

BIBB 

v 2 |j | 

H 

|§| 

ip ^ 

- j\ — 

aVF ‘ 

■ II 

V3 fj 

A 

. k 

XJl 


!i,- L 

J.1 ,! 

-j__ I'--/" I''./' - / '" J 

1 



Fig. 6.5 Left bundle branch block. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


Continued 





























































































































































CHEST PAIN 


Clinical tool: the ECG in acute chest pain 


A 


Clinical tool—cont’d 

ECG abnormalities in chest pain 


ST elevation in leads V 2 -V 5 can be a normal finding (‘high 
take off’) and, in the absence of a previous ECG, may 
cause diagnostic confusion. With high take-off, the ST 
elevation is typically concave and frequently associated 
with notching in the terminal portion of the QRS complex 
(Fig. 6.6). Appearances remain stable over time and there 
are no reciprocal changes. ECG features that favour acute 
pericarditis from STEMI include: widespread ST elevation 
(not corresponding to the territory of a single coronary 
artery); PR depression; the absence of reciprocal changes, 
Q wave formation or R wave loss; and TWI only after 
normalization of ST segments. 

The ECG in unstable angina/NSTEMI 

New horizontal ST depression suggests active ischaemia 
(Fig. 6.7); the extent and depth of depression correlate 
with severity of ischaemia and risk of adverse outcomes. 
‘Dynamic ST segment changes - those that coincide 
with pain and normalize with resolution of pain - strongly 
suggest ischaemia. It is therefore important to compare 


the presenting hospital ECG with that obtained by the pre¬ 
hospital ambulance service. On the other hand, slight ST 
depression, especially if up-sloping, may be normal 
TWI may be the only ECG evidence of ischaemia. Biphasic 
TWI in leads V2-V3 (Fig. 6.8) or deep symmetrical 
TWI in these leads +/- other praecordial leads 
(Fig. 6.9) suggests critical obstruction of the left anterior 
descending artery (Wellens' syndrome). Other patterns of 
TWI are less specific. Lateral TWI, together with 
downward-sloping ST depression, is a common feature of 
left ventricular hypertrophy (Fig. 6.10) or digitalis 
treatment; comparison with previous ECGs is very helpful. 
TWI confined to leads V,-V 3 (Fig. 6.1 1) suggests right 
heart strain and favours a diagnosis of PE over ACS. TWI 
also occurs with cardiomyopathies, pericarditis, 
myocarditis, cerebrovascular events (especially 
subarachnoid haemorrhage), electrolyte abnormalities and 
hyperventilation. However, in the appropriate 
clinical context, new or evolving TWI supports a diagnosis 
of ACS. 


i 

VR 

Vi 

J V 1 I | 

fit 1 
^- 

.-a-j ' T v 

VL 


J II I 

II 

v 2 

V 5 


■Bil 

llllllllllllllll 

i 


III 

1 VF 

i i i 

v 3 

l\ A /I 

v 6 

ni_i_ j — 


——j-Jf ^—— A ^—4 V— 

4MU 


Fig. 6.6 'High take-off ST segments. (From Hampton JR. The ECG Made Easy, 7th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, 2008.) 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 














CHEST PAIN 


Clinical tool: the ECG in acute chest pain 


Clinical tool—cont’d 

ECG abnormalities in chest pain 



Fig. 6.7 Ischaemic anterolateral ST segment depression. (From Hampton JR. The ECG in Practice, 5th edn. Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone, 2008.) 



Fig. 6.8 Biphasic T wave inversion in leads V2-V3. 


MIUM 

i 

: i| H 

liliiflttlittttffititW 

aVR 1 

ITT rM r 

—■ 

1 v 4 V 


H 

aVL 

i 

1 

AA 

iir /v ~^ 

" V"" 

a\iFf 


rtn J r 

- J ~ L 


\ [p-y ]' 



-~T-t 


Fig. 6.9 Deep symmetrical T wave inversion 


Continued 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
























































































































































































































































































































CHEST PAIN 


Clinical tool: the ECG in acute chest pain 


A 


Clinical tool—cont’d 

ECG abnormalities in chest pain 


The ECG in acute pericarditis 

Acute pericarditis characteristically produces diffuse, 
concave (upward-sloping) ST elevation in most leads, with 
ST depression in aVR (Fig. 6.12). Associated PR segment 
depression (with PR elevation in aVR) is highly suggestive. 
Unlike STEMI, ST elevation typically persists for many days. 
T waves are upright during ST changes but subsequently 
invert. 

The ECG in PE 

In most cases, the ECG is normal or shows only sinus 
tachycardia. Specific abnormalities suggestive of PE 
include new right axis deviation, a dominant R wave in lead 


V,, TWI in leads V,-V 3 (Fig. 6.11) or right bundle branch 
block (Fig. 6.13). The ‘classical’ ECG finding of a deep 
slurred S wave in I with a Q wave and TWI in III SAT 3 ’) 
is rare. 

The ECG in aortic dissection 

The ECG may be normal or show non-specific 
abnormalities. If the dissection flap involves the ostium 
of a coronary artery, there may be ECG changes of a 
STEMI (usually inferior) The ECG may change rapidly, 
i.e. changes of STEMI may resolve then recur, due to 
differential changes in blood pressure in the true and false 
aortic lumens. 



Fig. 6.10 Left ventricular hypertrophy. (From Hampton JR. The ECG Made Easy, 7th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, 2008.) 



Fig. 6.11 Anterior T wave inversion due to acute right heart strain. (From Hampton JR. The ECG in Practice, 5th edn. 
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2008.) 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 




















CHEST PAIN 


Clinical tool: the ECG in acute chest pain 


Clinical tool—cont’d 

ECG abnormalities in chest pain 



Fig. 6.12 Acute pericarditis. (From Hampton JR 150 ECG Problems, 3rd edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2008.) 



Fig. 6.13 Right bundle branch block. (From Hampton JR. 150 ECG Problems, 3rd edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, 2008.) 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













CHEST PAIN 


Acute chest pain: overview 


ABCOE, ECG 


Refer urgently to 
Cardiology 


No 


ECG changes suggest STEMI 
(see Box 6.1)? 


yes 


■+• Likely STEMI 


‘Major’ ischaemic ECG changes 

Yes 

(see Box 6.1)? 



Likely ACS 


No 


See Further 
assessment of 
NSTEMI / unstable 
angina (p. 65) 


Suspect aortic dissection / PE / 

Yes 

Aortic dissection, pulmonary 

oesophageal rupture? 

imaging 

embolism, oesophageal 
rupture, other 



, 


No <*■ 


>1 diagnostic features of pericarditis? 


Yes 


* 


Pericarditis 


No 


Clear history of pleuritic pain? 

Yes 


J No 



History cons stent with ACS? 

No Yes 


See acute pleuritic pain 
(P-64) 


Full clinical assessment, repeat ECG, cardiac biomarkers, CXR, FBC, U+E 


Any ischaemic ECG changes 

Yes 

Likely ACS; consider 

(see Box 6.1) or Ttroponin? 


alternative causes 


See Further assessment 
of NSTEMI / unstable 
angina (p. 63) 


J No 


High clinical probability of ACS? 

Yes 


■ 

No 


Low clinical probability of ACS 

No 

diagnosis? 



Yes ◄- 



Likely ACS 


See Further assessment 
of NSTEMI / unstable 
angina (p. 63) 


Consider further investigation for underlying 
coronary artery disease 


Consider Gl, musculoskeletal, respiratory mediastinal and psychological causes 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





























































CHEST PAIN 


Acute chest pain: step-by-step assessment 


ECG changes suggest STEMI 
(see Box 6.1)? 

Patien s with acute chest pain and ECG changes 
compatible with STEMI (see Box 6.1) are likely 
to benefit from immediate reperfusion therapy, 
e.g. primary angioplasty or thrombolysis. 

Unless ECG changes are old, the history is 
incompatible with ACS (Box 6.4) or there is a 
strong clinical suspicion of aortic dissection (see 
below), make a diagnosis of STEMI. 

• Attach cardiac monitoring and repeat 
ABCDE (p. 8) regularly. 

• Establish the duration of the pain and 
whether it is ongoing. 

• In younger patients with few or no risk 
factors for CAD, ask specifically about 
cocaine or amphetamine use. 

• Seek urgent Cardiology input if there is 
diagnostic doubt, haemodynamic instabi ity 
or if primary angioplasty services are 
available. 

• If angioplasty is not available, confirm eligibility 
for thrombolysis (see Box 22.3, p. 207). 

If ST elevation is present but does not meet 
the above criteria, repeat the ECG at frequent 
regular intervals and manage as per NSTEMI/ 
unstable angina. 

Seek urgent Cardiology input if there is 
any uncertainty regarding diagnosis or ECG 
interpretation. 


2 


Major’ ischaemic ECG changes 
(see Box 6.1)? 


If the ECG shows ‘major’ ischaemic changes, 
clarify that the history is consistent with ACS (see 


Box 6 4) and proceed to further assessment of 
NSTEMI/unstable angina. Seek expert help if 
there is any doubt regarding ECG interpretation 
If the ECG is non-diagnostic, e.g. old left 
bundle branch block, paced ventricular rhythm: 

• manage as per NSTEMI/unstable angina 
if clinical features strongly suggest ACS, 
e.g. pulmonary oedema or presenting 
symptoms very similar to previous Ml 

• consider a near-patient troponin assay, 
if available (these are specific, i.e. good 
to rule in, but not sensitive, i.e. not good 
enough to rule out, for Ml) 

• otherwise, await laboratory troponin 
results - check on admission; if negative, 
repeat up to 12 hours after maximal pain 
depending on your local protocol and 
local troponin assay. Some high sensitive 
troponin assays are more than 99% 
sensitive for Ml at 6 hours after maximal 
pain, or even 3 hours at lower threshold 
values. 


6 


3 


Suspect aortic dissection, PE or 
oesophageal rupture? 


In the absence of clear ECG evidence of 
ischaemia/infarction, consider other life- 
threatening conditions such as aortic dissection, 
massive PE and oesophageal rupture. For all of 
these a high index of suspicion is vital since delay 
in diagnosis may prove fatal and characteristic 
‘textbook’ clinical features are often absent. 

You must exclude aortic dissection in patients 
with severe acute chest pain and ANY of the 
features in Box 6.5. In the absence of these 


Box 6.4 What symptoms are consistent with 
acute coronary syndrome? 


Symptoms of myocardial ischaemia vary widely and often 
differ from textbook descriptions so, when confronted 
with compelling ECG evidence of ischaemia, you are 
likely to find that very few accounts of chest discomfort 
are inconsistent with ACS. 

Any pain in the chest (or arms/jaw) that lasts >10 
minutes or that occurs repeatedly for minutes at a time 
with little or no exertion, is consistent with ACS. The task 
is to determine (using the ECG, cardiac biomarkers, the 
description of the pain and the underlying likelihood of 
CAD) whether the pain is likely to represent ACS 


Box 6.5 Features suggestive of acute 
aortic dissection 


• Pain reaches maximal intensity within seconds 
of onset 

• Main site of pain is interscapular 

• Character of pain described as ‘tearing’ or ‘ripping’ 

• Syncope or new focal neurological signs 

• New early diastolic murmur (aortic regurgitation) 

• Asymmetrical pulses (not previously documented) 

• Inter-arm blood pressure differential greater than 
20 mmHg 

• Marfan's syndrome 

• Widened mediastinum on CXR 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 




















CHEST PAIN 


Acute chest pain: step-by-step assessment 


features, consider the diagnosis in any patient 
with a first presentation of severe acute chest 
pain and no clear alternative diagnosis, especially 
if: 

• there is a background of hypertension, 
previous aortic surgery, trauma or 
pregnancy, or 

• the pain is described as ‘sharp’ or radiates 
to the back. 

A normal CXR does not exclude the diagnosis. 
There are two characteristic age presentation 
peaks for dissection; by far the most common is 
in the 7th decade (majority male and associated 
with atheroscle osis) but there is also a small 
peak in the 3rd decade that mustn’t be forgotten 
(mainly females and associated with connective 
tissue disease). 

If you suspect dissection, arrange immediate 
contrast enhanced thoracic CT or transoe- 
sophageal echo; in unstable patients, consider 
bedside transthoracic echo, which will identify 
most type A dissections (but does not exclude 
the diagnosis). 

Consider massive PE if there is sudden-onset, 
severe chest pain associated with any of the 
following features: 

• marked dyspnoea or hypoxaemia in the 
absence of pulmonary oedema 

• high risk of PE, e.g. malignancy, recent 
surgery, prolonged immobility or clinical 
evidence of DVT 

• syncope or signs of shock (Box 30.1 , 
p 267) - especially with TJVP 

• suggestive ECG changes (p. 58). 

In hypotensive or peri-arrest patients, consider 
urgent transthoracic echo to look for evidence of 
acute right heart strain and exclude alternative 
diagnoses, e.g. cardiac tamponade and consider 
thrombolysis (after excluding contraindications; 
Box 22.3, p. 207). Otherwise, arrange prompt 
CT pulmonary angiography. 

Suspect oesophageal perforation if acute 
severe chest pain arises after vomiting/retching 
or oesophageal instrumentation. Arrange immedi¬ 
ate CXR if >1 hour after perforation (may show 
subcu aneous emphysema, pneumomediastinum 
or pleural effusion); otherwise, request water- 
soluble contrast barium swallow/CT and surgical 
review. 


More than one diagnostic features 
of pericarditis? 


Diagnose pericarditis if more than one of the 
following features is present: 

• pain radiating to the trapezius ridge (highly 
specific for pericarditis) or has typical 
features (see p. 51) 

• pericardial friction rub (85% of cases) 

• typical ECG changes (p. 58; present in 80% 
of cases). 

Request an echocardiogram to detect any 
associated effusion (urgently if any features of 
tamponade - p. 265) and assess LV function 
(may be impaired if associated myocarditis). 


5 


Clear history of pleuritic pain? 


If the patient reports pain that clearly and 
consistently varies with respiratory movements, 
especially if described as ‘sharp’ ‘knife-like’, 
‘stabbing’ or ‘catching’, then proceed to Acute 
pleuritic pain (p. 66). If there is any doubt, con¬ 
tinue on the diagnostic pathway for non-pleuritic 
pain initially and reconsider if no clear diagnosis 
emerges or the patient's description becomes 
more suggestive of pleuritic pain. 


6 


History consistent with ACS? 


Further assessment for ACS is generally not 
required in patients with: 

• a single short-lived episode of pain, e.g 
<10 minutes 

• a typical episode of stable exertional angina 

• a clear alternative cause for pain, e.g. 
herpes zoster; recent chest wall injury with 
tenderness on palpation 

• an atypical history and very low risk of for 
CAD, e.g. <30 years with no risk factors. 

Otherwise, consider admission for repeat ECG 
and cardiac biomarkers. 


7 


Any ischaemic ECG changes 
(see Box 6.1) or Ttroponin? 


Repeat the ECG at least once and also during 
any further episodes of pain. Measure serum 
troponin concentration up to 12 hours from the 
onset of maximal pain, depending on the assay 
being used. If the ECG is non-diagnostic but you 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 











CHEST PAIN 


Acute chest pain: step by-step assessment 


Box 6.6 Conditions associated with 
elevation of serum troponin other than acute 
coronary syndrome 


• Acute decompensated heart failure 

• Tachy- or bradyarrhythmias 

• Myocarditis/myopericarditis 

• Aortic dissection 

• Pulmonary embolism 

• Prolonged severe hypotension/cardiac arrest 

• Severe sepsis or burns 

• Cardiac trauma/surgery/ablation 

• Acute neurological disease, e.g. stroke, subarachnoid 
haemorrhage 

• Congestive cardiac failure 

• Infiltrative card ac diseases, e.g. sarcoidosis, 
amyloidosis 

• End-stage renal failure 


Box 6.7 Angina symptom score 


Retrosternal discomfort without atypical 
features 1 

1 point 

Discomfort arises during physical exertion 2 

1 point 

Discomfort is relieved by rest or GTN within 
5-10 minutes 

1 point 

’Atypicalpain features include a 'sharp or ‘stabbing’ quality; 
significant variation with inspiration or position; or a high degree 

of localisation, e.g. point with tip of finger. 


2 Do not score point if discomfort is fleeting; occurs after but not 
during exertion; is induced only by specific movements/actions; 
or has inconsisten relationship, e.g. also occurs regularly 

without any provocation. 



suspect ACS, check troponin early (laboratory 
or ‘near-patient’ testing) to expedite diagnosis, 
but always repeat at an appropriate interval after 
maximal pain if the initial test is negative (12 
hours with conventional assays but often less 
with high sensitivity assays) 

Diagnose ACS in patients with a convincing 
history of ischaemic chest pain accompanied 
by Ttroponin or any ECG evidence of ischaemia 
(see Box 6.1). 

In patients with an atypical history or 
low underlying risk of CAD, first consider alterna¬ 
tive causes of Ttroponin (Box 6.6) and ECG 
changes (see Box 6.1), e.g. PE, myopericarditis 
or aortic dissection, but proceed to further 
assessment of ACS if there is no clear alternative 
cause. 


8 


High clinical probability of ACS? 


Now try to identify the subset of patients 
with unstable angina but no ECG evidence of 
ischaemia or significant myocyte necrosis. This 
presentation has become much less common 
since the advent of high sensitivity troponin 
assays. ACS is unlikely if biomarkers remain 
normal despite pain persisting at high intensity 
for a prolonged period, e.g. >1 hour since this 
degree of ischaemia would be expected to cause 
myocyte necrosis. However, consider unstable 
angina if the patient reports repeated shorter lived 


episodes of chest discomfort occurring on 
minimal exertion or at rest, especially if: 

• the symptoms mimic previous episodes of 
anginal chest discomfort, or 

• the patient has established CAD or high 
likelihood of CAD (see Box 6.7) and the 
pain is characteristic of myocardial 
ischaemia (see above). 

Refer patients with these features (or in 
whom the suspicion of ACS is otherwise high) 
to cardiology for further assessment. 


9 


Low clinical probability of ACS or features 
suggest alternative diagnosis? 


In the absence of the features above, unstable 
angina is unlikely if any of the following is present: 

• low likelihood of CAD (Box 6.3) 

• the pain persisted at high intensity for 
>1 hour (would expect troponin rise 

if ischaemic pain) and an ECG during 
maximal pain was normal 

• the symptoms mimic previous episodes of 
chest discomfort that are not suggestive of 
angina (Box 6.7). 

Seek an alternative explanation for chest pain 
in these patients. 

Further investigation (Box 6.8) may be helpful 
in patients who do not fall into either category, to 
look for evidence of underlying obstructive CAD. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


















CHEST PAIN 


Acute chest pain: step-by-step assessment 


Box 6.8 Investigations in suspected angina 


• Investigations are used to seek evidence of 
myocardial ischaemia during cardiac stress or to 
confirm and/or refute underlying CAD. 

• Exercise ECG and other ‘stress tests’ seek to 
establish whether increases in cardiac work induce 
myocardial ischaemia. During exercise, 

the development of typical symptoms with ST 
segment shift >1 mm suggests angina. Absence of 
symptoms and ECG changes at high workload argues 
against angina. 

• Exercise ECG is often inconclusive and has a high 
‘false-positive’ rate in low isk patients. Other forms 
of stress testing, e.g myocardial perfusion scan or 
dobutamine stress echo, offer higher sensitivity/ 
specificity and are particularly useful when the 
resting ECG is abnormal, e.g. left bundle branch 
block or the patient is unable to perform treadmill 
exercise. 

• Stress tests are contraindicated in unstable angina, 
decompensated heart failure or severe hypertension. 

• Coronary angiography is the definitive test for 
defining the presence, extent and severity of CAD. 
Severe stenosis in one or more vessels st ongly 
suggests ischaemia as the cause of pain whilst the 
absence of significant coronary stenosis effectively 
excludes angina. 

• In patients with a relatively low risk of CAD, CT 
coronary angiography is a useful, non-invasive 
method to rule out stable angina by excluding the 
presence of significant CAD. 


10 


Consider non-cardiac causes of 
chest pain 


• Make a clinical diagnosis of GORD, 
musculoskeletal pain or herpes zoster if 
there are typical features (see p. 52). 

• Consider paroxysmal tachyarrhythmia if the 
pain was accompanied by rapid palpitation 
and an ECG was not obtained during 
symptoms. 

• Re-evaluate for aortic dissection or PE and 
consider echocardiogram/thoracic CT if 
ongoing pain haemodynamic compromise 
or other clinical concern. 

• Consider thoracic or respiratory review if 
there is an unexplained CXR abnormality, 
e.g. mediastinal/hilar mass. 

• Reassess for pericarditis and arrange an 
echocardiogram to look for pericardial 
effusion, if there are any suggestive features 
(see step 4, above) or cardiomegaly on 
CXR. 

• Consider hyperventilation or anxiety if there 
are suggestive clinical features (see p. 52) 
associated with -lPaC0 2 (with normal Pa0 2 ) 
and PE has been excluded. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 









CHEST PAIN 


Acute chest pain: further assessment 


65 


Further assessment of NSTEMI/ 
unstable angina 

Step 11dentify critically unwell patients 

Attach cardiac monitoring to all patients with 
ongoing chest pain and review regularly with 
repeat ECG. Admit to a CCU/HDU and arrange 
urgent Cardiology review if you identify any of 
the following: 

• shock (p. 267) 

• pulmonary oedema 

• ventricular arrhythmia, complete heart block 
(see Fig. 31 .2, p. 279) 

• ST elevation or refractory pain. 

Step 2 Consider all potential factors contributing to 
myocardial ischaemia 

In patients with ongoing pain: 

• maintain Sp0 2 >94% 

• identify and treat tachyarrhythmias 

• if any suspicion of anaemia or acute 
bleeding, e.g. pallor, haematemesis, 
melaena, check Hb urgently (prior to giving 
antiplatelet agents/anticoagulants) 

• if tachycardic, assess and treat any 
ongoing pain, then consider beta-blockade 
(if no contraindications) 


• evaluate the response to GTN spray; if pain 
improves, consider IV GTN infusion. 

Consider paroxysmal tachyarrhythmia, e.g. 
atrial fibrillation, as the mechanism for NSTEMI 
in patients who did not have an ECG during 
pain, e.g. if pain associated with palpitation or 
previous history of arrhythmia 


Step 3 Identify high-risk patients 

Risk-stratify patients using a validated scoring 
system such as the GRACE score (http://www 
.gracescore.org/websiteAA/ebVersion.aspx). The 
GRACE score predicts the risk of in-hospital and 
6 month death in patients with ACS and can be 
used to aid the selection of patients for clinical 
and interventional procedures. 


6 


Step 4 Use cardiac biomarkers to differentiate 
unstable angina from NSTEMI 

Measure serum troponin I or T up to 12 hours 
from the onset of maximal pain (can often be 
measured earlier with highly sensitive assays). 
If t, classify as NSTEMI; otherwise, classify as 
unstable angina. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 






66 


Acute pleuritic pain: overview 


1 Diagnostic CXR abnormality? 

No Yes 


No 


No 


Pneumothorax? 

Yes 


^ No 



Pneumothorax 



Yes 






Pleural effusion? 

Yes 


No 



See Further assessment 
of respiratory tract infection 
(P-123) 


-► See Further assessment of pleural effusion (p. 129) 



Yes 






Clinical signs of consolidation + 
features of respiratory tract infection? 


Yes 


Likely pneumonia 


See Further assessment 
of respiratory tract infection 
(P-123) 


No 


Clinical o CXR suspicion of 

Yes 


Malignancy or other 

me 

ilignancy? 



cause 


No 


Full clinical assessment, FBC D-dimer, +/- CRP, ABG 


Pericardial rub or ‘pericarditic’ 

Yes 


ECG changes? 




| No 


Wells score >4 or raised D-dimer 

Yes 

Pulmonary embolism 

or unexplained hypoxaemia? 


or other cause 


No 


6 


Likely musculoskeletal pain or viral infection 
Consider other causes 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















































CHEST PAIN 


67 


Acute pleuritic pain: step-by-step assessment 


1 Diagnostic CXR abnormality? 

Look carefully for: 

• pneumothorax (see Fig. 12.5, p. 118) — 
small pneumothoraces are easily missed 

• consolidation (see Figs 12.3 and 12.4, 
p. 11 8) - if present, go to further 
assessment of respiratory tract infection 
(RTI) (p. 123), especially if accompanied by 
cough, purulent sputum, dyspnoea or fever 

• pleural effusion (see Fig. 1 2.6, p. 11 9) - if 
present, assess as on page 129 

• rib fractures or metastatic deposits - if the 
latter are present, investigate for a primary 
lung, renal, thyroid, breast or prostate 
cancer or multiple myeloma. 


2 


Clinical signs of consolidation + features 
of respiratory tract infection? 


Even in the absence of definitive CXR changes, 
pneumonia is the likely diagnosis if pleuritic pain 
is accompanied by: 

• focal chest signs, e.g. crackles, bronchial 
breathing, and 

• symptoms of RTI: productive cough, acute 
dyspnoea or fever 

If present, assess as per on page 123. 


3 


Clinical or CXR suspicion of malignancy? 


Consider further investigation with CT chest ± 
bronchoscopy in patients >40 years or with a 
history of smoking/asbestos exposure if pain is 
accompanied by: 

• a history of weight loss 

• recurrent or unexplained haemoptysis 

• recent change in voice 

• persistent cervical lymphadenopathy 

• finger clubbing 

• suspicious CXR changes (see Box 17.1 , 
p. 163). 


Pe icardial rub or ‘pericarditic’ 

ECG changes? 

Diagnose pericarditis if pleuritic pain is accom¬ 
panied by typical ECG features of pericarditis 
(see Box 6.1) or a pericardial rub. 


5 


Wells score >4 or raised D-dimer or 
unexplained hypoxaemia? 


6 


You must exclude PE in any patient with acute 
pleuritic pain and no other obvious cause. A 
negative D-dimer test in patients with a Wells 
score <4 (see Fig. 12.7, p. 120) effectively rules 
out the diagnosis makes the diagnosis unlikely. 
Arrange further investigation with CTPA if the Wells 
score is >4 (irrespective of D-dimer), D-dimer is 
positive, or clinical suspicion is otherwise high, 
e.g. unexplained hypoxaemia, features of right 
heart strain on ECG (see Box 6.1). 

CTPA may provide an alternative cause for 
the presentation in patients without PE. 


6 


Likely musculoskeletal pain or viral 
infection. Consider other causes 


Seek a respiratory opinion and consider further 
imaging in patients with dyspnoea or a new 
CXR abnormality other than those described 
above. Consider drug-induced pleuritis, e.g. 
amiodarone, methotrexate, or pleurisy seconda y 
to a connective tissue disorder, e.g. history or 
clinical features of systemic lupus erythematosus/ 
rheumatoid arthritis. 

Otherwise, the most likely diagnoses are 
viral pleurisy or musculoskeletal pain. Suspect 
the former if there is fever, coryzal or ‘flu-like’ 
symptoms or a pleural rub; suspect the latter 
if there is any recent injury, prolonged severe 
coughing, unusually strenuous upper body activ¬ 
ity, marked exacerbation of pain on movement 
or obvious tenderness on palpation. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

















CHEST PAIN 


Intermittent chest pain: overview 


Full clinical assessment, ECG 


Angina score = 3 OR 
Angina score = 2 + high / 
moderate risk of CAD 


No 


No 


Yes 


Possible stable 
angina 


See Further 
assessment 
of suspected 
angina (P- 71) 


Characteristic description of 

Yes 

Consider unstable angina / 

‘ischaemic-type’ pain? 


oesophageal spasm 


Retrosternal discomfort that is: 

(a) hot or burning, (b) relieved by antacids 
or (c) provoked by food / lying down? 


Yes 


Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease 


No 


Pain highly localised, induced by specific 
movements or reproduced by palpation? 


Yes 


Musculoskeletal pain 


No 




Yes 

Consider bronchospasm 








! 


' 



Pain provoked by stress / strong 

Yes 











No 

' 




Evaluate for angina in patients with high risk of CAD 
Look for evidence of underlying anxiety / depressive disorder 
Consider trial of simple analgesia or acid suppression therapy 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



















































CHEST PAIN 


69 


Intermittent chest pain: step-by-step assessment 


Angina score = 3 OR Angina score = 2 + 
high/moderate risk of CAD? 

The hallmark of stable angina is a correlation 
between symptoms and alterations in cardiac 
work. Retrosternal discomfort that consistently 
arises during exertion and is rapidly relieved 
(<5 minutes) by rest strongly suggests angina. 
The quality of the discomfort may vary widely 
and is frequently vague or non-specific. The 
likelihood of angina also depends on the risk of 
underlying CAD. With rare exceptions, coronary 
atherosclerosis is cen ral to the pathogenesis of 
angina, so patients with a low risk of CAD have 
a correspondingly low risk of angina. 

• Calculate the ‘angina score’ based on 
the three criteria in Box 6.7, then broadly 
stratify the a priori risk of CAD based on 
age, sex and risk factors (see Box 6.3). 

• If angina score = 3, go to further 
assessment of possible angina, irrespective 
of risk factors. 

• If angina score = 2, go to further 
assessment of possible angina unless 
‘low-risk’ of CAD. 

• Consider further assessment for possible 
angina in patients at high risk of CAD in 
whom the history is vague or unclear. 


Characteristic description of 
‘ischaemic-type’ pain? 


The typical manifestation of myocardial ischae¬ 
mia is a diffuse, poorly localized, retrosternal 
discomfort that radiates to the neck, jaw and 
left (or right) shoulder and/or arm, and has a 
tight, constricting, pressure-like, aching or heavy 
quality. It is frequently described as discomfort 
rather than pain. Patients often illustrate the 
sensation by placing a hand or fist over the 
centre of the chest. 

Intermittent episodes of myocardial ischaemia 
unrelated to exertion may occur with critical 
coronary obstruction due to plaque rupture and 
thrombus formation (unstable angina), coronary 
artery spasm (vasospastic angina) or paroxysmal 
tachyarrhythmia (especially in the presence of 
an underlying coronary stenosis). Oesophageal 


spasm may closely mimic ischaemic-type dis¬ 
comfort and also lacks a consistent relationship 
to exertion. 

Consider these diagnoses in patients with 
characteristic ischaemic-type discomfort that 
lacks a predictable relationship to exertion or 
(with the exception of unstable angina) in whom 
stress testing fails to demonstrate inducible 
myocardial ischaemia. 

Suspect unstable angina and refer to cardiol¬ 
ogy if any of the following: 

• new onset of symptoms within the 
preceding 2 weeks 

• episodes of discomfort previously related to 
exertion but now occurring at rest 

• new abnormality on resting ECG 
(see Box 6.1). 

Suspect paroxysmal arrhythmia if any of the 
following: 

• palpitation preceding or during 
symptoms 

• previously documented tachyarrhythmia 

• infrequent episodes of variable duration. 

If suspected, attempt to document the rhythm 
during a typical episode of symptoms. 

Suspect vasospastic angina if any of the 
following: 

• no apparent triggers 

• sudden onset of intense symptoms ± 
autonomic features 

• short duration of episodes (2-5 minutes) 

• episodes occurring in clusters. 

If suspected, consider a trial of Holter ECG 
monitoring to look for evidence of ST elevation 
during symptomatic episodes 
Suspect oesophageal spasm if any of the 
following: 

• intermittent dysphagia 

• history or typical symptoms of GORD (see 
below) 

• discomfort occurring predominantly at night 
or after eating. 

If the history suggests GORD, consider reas¬ 
sessment after a trial of a proton pump inhibitor; 
otherwise, refer to the Gl team for consideration 
of upper Gl endoscopy/oesophageal manometry. 


6 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










CHEST PAIN 


Intermittent chest pain: step-by-step assessment 



Retrosternal discomfort that is: (a) hot or 



Pain provoked by stress/strong emotion 

3 

burning, (b) relieved by antacids or (c) 


6 

or associated with features 


provoked by food/lying down? 



of hyperventilation? 


If the pain is unlikely to be cardiac, seek typical 
features of other disorders. The above features 
suggest GORD; a symptomatic response to acid 
suppression therapy, e.g. proton pump inhibitor, 
effectively confirms the diagnosis. Upper Gl 
endoscopy is usually not required but consider 
if symptoms are refractory 


Pain highly local zed, induced by specific 
movements or reproduced by palpation? 

Musculoskeletal pain may present in a multitude 
of ways. The above features are suggestive, as is 
a history of recent injury, strain or uncharacteristi¬ 
cally vigorous activity. Further investigation is 
rarely necessary; a symptomatic response to 
simple analgesia helps to confirm the diagnosis. 


5 


Wheeze, breathlessness, cough? 


Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease may be difficult to distinguish from angina 
on clinical grounds if symptoms are provoked 
by exertion and produce a sensation of chest 
‘tightness’. Helpful diagnostic features may 
include a history of cough or wheeze (especially 
nocturnal), diurnal variation in symptoms, the 
presence of wheeze on auscultation, a history 
of atopy and absence of risk factors for CAD. If 
asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
is suspected, evaluate as described in Chapter 12 


Attributing episodes of chest pain to anxiety can 
be challenging. Emotional distress increases 
cardiac work and may provoke angina, but 
symptoms that occur exclusively in this context 
are more likely to have a psychological origin. 
Associated features of panic or hyperventilation 
during episodes, e.g breathlessness with ‘inabil¬ 
ity to take in enough air’ or a choking sensation, 
tingling in the extremities and light-headedness, 
support the diagnosis. Seek specialist input 
before attributing a new presentation of chest 
pain to anxiety in patients with a high risk of CAD. 


7 


Evaluate for angina in patients at high 
risk of CAD. Consider other causes. 


In many patients it is not possible to reach a defi¬ 
nite diagnosis. Reassess those with inconclusive 
investigations for angina or with a high likelihood 
of CAD (see Box 6.3) if symptoms persist. Where 
a cardiac cause has been ruled out and no other 
cause is apparent, patients often respond to 
simple reassurance. However, a minority 
experience severe, refractory symptoms and 
may merit specialist assessment for underlying 
psychological factors and/or management of 
chronic pain. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















CHEST PAIN 


Intermittent chest pain: further assessment 


Further assessment of suspected angina 

Step 1 Consider unstable angina and structural 
heart disease 

An abrupt onset or sudden worsening of exer¬ 
tional chest pain indicates unstable angina - see 
p. 65. 

Arrange echocardiography to exclude aortic 
stenosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy if the 
patient has an ejection systolic murmur, exertional 
syncope or ECG features of left ventricular 
hypertrophy (see Fig. 6.8). 

Step 2 Confirm or refute the diagnosis 

In patients >40 years with a typical history (angina 
score 3) and moderate/high likelihood of CAD 
(see Box 6.3), make a clinical diagnosis of stable 
angina and proceed to step 3. 

If the risk of CAD is low (see Box 6.3), consider 
CT coronary angiography, if available, as a first 
line investigation (Box 6.8). If negative, return to 
the algorithm for intermittent chest pain (re-enter 
at step 3). If positive, proceed to a stress test 
or invasive angiography. 

Otherwise, consider a stress test (Box 6.8). If 
positive, diagnose stable angina and proceed to 
step 3. If negative, i.e. no evidence of inducible 
ischaemia at high stress return to the algorithm 
for intermittent chest pain (re-enter at step 3). 
Seek input from cardiology if you have a high 


clinical suspicion and are unable to identify a 
clear alternative cause. 

If results are equivocal, e.g. suboptimal test, 
minor abnormality, or typical symptoms without 
ECG changes), consider an alternative stress test 
or coronary angiography to clarify the diagnosis. 


Step 3 Assess symptom severity and risk 

The severity of angina is based not on the 
intensity of pain but the frequency of symptoms, 
impairment of exercise capacity and consequent 
functional limitation As this information is used to 
guide treatment and monitor response, quantify 
symptoms accurately and determine their impact 
on work, hobbies and daily activities. Persistence 
of limiting symptoms despite anti-anginal therapy 
is an indication for angiography with a view to 
revascularisation. 

Exercise ECG may identify high risk patients 
whose prognosis could be improved by revas¬ 
cularisation. Refer patients for angiography if 
there are any of the following abnormalities on 
exercise ECG: 

• ST elevation 

• severe or widespread ST depression 

• ST depression at low workload or for a 
prolonged period in recovery 

• fall or failure to rise in BP 

• ventrcular arrhythmia. 


6 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 






Coma and altered consciousness 


Consciousness is a poorly defined, ill-understood 
term. ‘Normal’ consciousness requires: 

• an intact ascending reticular activating 
system (located in the brainstem and 
responsible for arousal) and 

• normal function of the cerebral cortex, 
thalamus and their connections 
(responsible for cognition). 

Altered consciousness results if either malfunc¬ 
tions. Minor defects, e.g. memory impairment 
disorientation or slow cerebration, can be subtle 
and difficult to detect, especially if there are co¬ 
existent language, visual or speech problems. 
Consider multi-factorial causes contributing to 
altered consciousness, e.g. a patient who has 
taken alcohol falls in the street, sustaining a head 
injury, lying unnoticed for hours and becoming 
hypothermic. 

The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS; Table 7.1) was 
developed to assess/prognosticate head injury 
and is commonly used to record conscious level 
although it is less well validated in non-traumatic 
conditons. A GCS score <15/15 indicates 
altered consciousness. ‘Coma’ denotes a patient 
with no eye response and a GCS <8/15. Do not 
use terms such as semi-conscious, stuporous, 
obtunded, etc. 

Minor disturbance of consciousness is a 
central feature of delirium, see Chapter 8. The 
assessment pathway in this chapter is appropri¬ 
ate for patients with a GCS <15 and: 

• E <3, V <4 or M <5 i e. >1 point drop in at 
least one domain 

• known or suspected head injury 

• a clinical picture not suggestive of delirium. 

As the patient is unlikely to be able to give a 
clear history, it is essential to obtain a history 


from witnesses, relatives or ambulance crew. In 

particular, ask about: 

• the circumstances in which the patient 
was found, e.g. exposure to temperature 
extremes or poisons 

• the speed, nature and surrounding 
events, e.g. sudden onset - subarachnoid 
haemorrhage, seizure, trauma; 

gradual - expanding intracranial lesion, 
metabolic conditions; fluctuating - recurrent 
seizures; recent flu-like illness - meningitis, 
sepsis 

• trauma, e.g. road traffic accident, falls, 
assault 

• drug history (prescribed and over-the- 
counter), alcohol and recreational 
drug use 

• past medical history. Important causes to 
consider are listed below. 


Metabolic causes 

• Hypo-/hyper-glycaemia. 

• Hypo-/hyper-thermia. 

• Hypo-/hyper-natraemia. 

• Hypothyroidism. 

• Metabolic acidosis. 


Drugs/toxins 

• Alcohol. 

• Opioids, benzodiazepines, tricyclic 
antidepressants, barbiturates etc. 

• ‘Recreational’ drugs, e.g. 
gamma-hydroxybutyrate (GHB), ketamine, 
mephedrone, etc. 

• Carbon monoxide/other cellular toxins, e.g 
cyanide. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 







COMA AND ALTERED CONSCIOUSNESS 


Differential diagnosis 


Table 7. Glasgow Coma Scale 

Criter on 

Score 

Eye opening 

Spontaneous 

4 

To speech 

3 

To pain 

2 

No response 

1 

Verbal response 

Orientated 

5 

Confused: talks in sentences but 
disorientated 

4 

Verbalizes: words not sentences 

3 

Vocalizes: sounds (groans or grunts) not 
words 

2 

No vocalization 

1 

Motor response 

Obeys commands 

6 

Localizes to pain, e.g. brings hand up 
beyond chin to supra-orbital pain 

5 

Flexion withdrawal to pain: no localisation 
to supra-orbital pain but flexes elbow to 
nail bed pressure 

4 

Abnormal flexion to pain 

3 

Extension to pain: extends elbow to nail 
bed pressure 

2 

No response 

1 

Record the GCS as a total and its three separate 

components e.g. GCS 9/15: E3, V2, M4 



CNS causes 

• Trauma: intracranial bleeding (extradural, 
subdural, intracerebral, subarachnoid), 
diffuse axonal injury. Note that patients 
taking anticoagulants or with bleeding 
disorders may have intracranial bleeding 
following minor, unrecognized trauma. 

• Infection: meningitis, encephalitis, cerebral 
abscess, cerebral malaria. 

• Stroke: cortex or brainstem. 

• Subarachnoid haemorrhage. 

• Epilepsy. 

• Intracranial space-occupying lesion, e.g. 
primary or secondary tumour. 

• Hypertensive encephalopathy. 

• Psychogenic. 

Organ failure 

• Shock. 

• Respiratory failure (hypoxia and/or 
hypercapnia). 

• Renal failure (uraemic encephalopathy). 

• Liver failure (hepatic encephalopathy). 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

































74 


COMA AND ALTERED CONSCIOUSNESS 


Overview 


ABCDE + collateral history 


1 Respiratory failure, shock or CBG <3.0? 


No 


No 


No 


No 


5 Witnessed seizure activity? 


No 


Yes 


Treat immediately and re-evaluate 



' es ^ Urgent cultures, 



and CT brain ± LP 




Yes 






Re warm and 
reassess 



Yes 








g GCS <8, head injury, headache or 
evidence of intracranial pathology? 


Yes 


Yes 


No 


• See seizure (p. 276) 


Urgent CT brain -h 

i 

i 

i 

_i 


Intracranial lesion 


Full clinical assessment, collateral history, FBC, U+E LFTs, glucose, Ca 2+ , TFTs 


7 Major metabolic derangement? 


No 


8 Suspicion of drug/alcohol toxicity? 


Yes 


Yes 


Correct (slowly if necessary) and reassess 


Collateral history; toxicology screen/drug levels 


No 


Consider hepatic/hypertensive encephalopathy, non-convulsive status epilepticus, CNS toxicity/ 
9 infection and psychogenic presentation. 

CT brain and toxicology screen if not already performed; MRI/LP/EEG if cause remains unclear 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 























































COMA AND ALTERED CONSCIOUSNESS 


75 


Step-by-step assessment 


1 Respiratory failure, shock or CBG <3.0? 

Ensure a patent airway and provide cervical 
spine control if you suspect trauma. As the 
GCS falls, particularly if GCS <8, definitive airway 
management, e.g. tracheal intubation, is likely 
to be required, so seek expert anaesthetic help 
early. Look for and treat rapidly reversible causes 
of iGCS as per the ABODE assessment: 

• assess oxygenation and ventilation by 
ABG analysis (p. 115). Treat hypoxia and 
hypercapnia urgently 

• give a therapeutic/diagnostic trial of 
naloxone (see below) if PaC0 2 is T or any 
evidence of respiratory depression 

• look for shock (see Box 30.1 , p. 267); if 
present, assess and treat as per Chapter 
30 

• check a capillary blood glucose reading 
(‘CBG’); if <3.0 mmol/L, send blood for 
formal laboratory glucose measurement but 
treat immediately with IV dextrose or IV/IM 
glucagon without waiting for the result. In 
patients with malnutrition/chronic alcohol 
excess, consider slow IV thiamine to 
prevent the (theoretical) risk of precipitating 
Wernicke’s encephalopathy. 

Reassess if confusion persists despite effective 
correction of all of the above. 


2 


Suspect CNS infection? 


Suspect CNS infection in any patient with iGCS 
accompanied by meningism (Box 18.2, p. 169), 
a new-onset maculopapular or purpuric rash, 
or fever. If malaria is a possibility, e.g. recent 
travel to endemic area, perform thick and thin 
blood films and seek immediate expert advice. 
Otherwise, take blood cultures and throat swabs, 
give empirical IV antibiotics/antivirals and arrange 
an urgent brain CT. If there is no clinical or CT 
contraindication, perform LP for CSF analysis 
(see Table 18.1, p. 171). 


3 


Co e temperature <34°C? 


Measure core temperature with a low-reading 
rectal thermometer in any patient with a tympanic 
reading <35°C or clinical suspicion of hypother¬ 
mia, e.g. prolonged immobility or exposure to 
wet and cold conditions. 

Suspect a contribution to altered conscious¬ 
ness from hypothermia if the core temperature 
is <34°C. Rewarm and reassess whilst searching 
for additional causes Check TFTs and consider 
treatment with IV tri-iodothyronine (T3) or 
IV levothyroxine (T4) (preceded by IV cortico¬ 
steroid) if there is any suspicion of myxoedema 
coma. 


4 


Any suspicion of opioid toxicity? 


Give a therapeutic/diagnostic trial of naloxone if 
the patient has received any opioid medication, 
is a known or suspected ‘recreational’ user, has 
small pupils or has no obvious alternative cause 
for altered consciousness. Any rapid improve¬ 
ment in conscious level, increase in respiratory 
rate/depth or pupil dilation indicates that opioids 
are contributing, at least in part, to the clinical 
state. The half-life of naloxone is shorter than 
most opioid/opioid metabolites, so further doses 
or an infusion are likely to be needed. 


Witnessed seizure activity? 


A clear, detailed history from an eyewitness is 
crucial. iGCS is common post-ictal, but seizures 
can be precipitated by a wide spectrum of 
conditions including hypoglycaemia, head injury 
± intracranial haematoma, alcohol withdrawal, 
drug overdose, e.g. tricyclic antidepressants, 
infection etc. 

In status epilepticus, associated hypoxia/ 
hypercapnia aggravates the cerebral injury and 
mortality is -10%. Assess further as described 
in Chapter 31 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













COMA AND ALTERED CONSCIOUSNESS 


Step-by-step assessment 


6 


GCS <8 head injury, headache or 
evidence of intracranial pathology? 


Once you have identified and treated major 
physiological derangement, life-threatening 
infection and rapidly reversible causes of iGCS, 
it is vital to identify an intracranial cause of altered 
consciousness. In general, immediate brain CT 
is required in patients with any of: 

• GCS<8 

• a history of headache, focal neurological 
symptoms, or lateralising neurological 
signs, e.g. unilateral pupillary abnormality, 
absence of limb movement or extensor 
plantar response, or signs of TlCP 

(Box 22 2, p, 199) 

• known or suspected head injury 

• CSF shunt in situ. 


Pa ients must be accompanied throughout by 
an individual who can provide advanced airway/ 
breathing support as intubation and controlled 
ventilation may be needed. 


Major metabolic derangement? 


Decreased GCS is common in hypo- and 
hypernatraemia. It tends to reflect the rate of 
sodium alteration rather than absolute values 
(see p. 88). If the disturbance is known to be 
acute, correct promptly then reassess; otherwise, 
correct cautiously, at a slow rate, with frequent 
remeasurement to avoid excessive neuronal fluid 
shifts and consequent cerebral oedema or central 
pontine myelinolysis. There may be a lag between 
correction of the metabolic derangement and 
return of normal conscious level. 

Decreased GCS may be a feature of diabetic 
ketoacidosis (DKA). Always consider DKA if the 
patient has Type 1 diabetes mellitus; confirm the 
diagnosis by identifying metabolic acidosis on 
ABG, ketonuria on urinalysis or blood ketones. 

Suspect Hyperosmolar Hyperglycaemic State 
(HHS), (formally HyperOsmolar Non-Ketotic coma 
- HONK) rather than DKA if there is marked 
hyperglycaemia (>30 mmol/L) and hyperos- 
molarity (>320 mOsm/kg) without significant 
hyperketonaemia (<3.0 mmol/L) or acidosis (pH 
>7 3 bicarbonate >15 mmol/L) - hypovolaemia 
and altered consciousness are common features. 

Suspect a contribution to altered conscious¬ 
ness from uraemia or disturbances of plasma 


calcium, magnesium or phosphate, only if 
derangement is severe. 


8 


Suspicion of drug/alcohol toxicity? 


Even in patients with a history or features of 
acute or chronic alcohol intake, never assume 
that altered consciousness is due to alcohol 
alone. The correlation between breath or blood 
alcohol levels and conscious level is poor, so 
beyond confirming that alcohol is present, these 
values are of limited help and can be potentially 
misleading. In particular, look for (and treat) 
alcohol-related hypoglycaemia, occult head injury, 
intracranial bleeding and recreational drug use 
or overdose. 

Examine for characteristic clinical ‘toxidromes’ 
(Table 7.2) in any patient with suspected overdose 
but remember that mixed overdoses or cocktails 
of drugs (often with alcohol) are common and 


Table 7.2 Common toxidromes associated with 
coma/altered consciousness 

Symptom/signs 

Drug 

Respiratory depression, 
small pupils 

Opioids 

Dilated pupils, tachycardia, 
hyper reflexia, Tmuscle 
tone, urinary retention. If 
severe: cardiac rhythm/ 

ECG abnormalities, J.BP, 
seizures 

Tricyclic 

antidepressants 

Hypotension, respiratory 
depression, bradycardia, 
i muscle tone 

Barbiturates, 

benzodiazepines 

Tachycardia, TBP, 
arrhythmias, dilated 
pupils, tremor, agitation 

Sympathomimetics, 
cocaine, ecstasy, 
amphetamines, SSRIs 

Agitation, myoclonus, 
seizures, nausea, 
bradycardia, coma 

Gamma- 

hydroxybutyrate (GHB) 

Vivid hallucinations, 
agitation, dysphoria, 
nystagmus, autonomic 
disturbance, seizures, 
coma 

Ketamine and 
phencyclidine (PCP) 

Euphoria, drowsiness, 

arrhythmias, 

laryngospasm 

Solvents 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 






















COMA AND ALTERED CONSCIOUSNESS 


Step by-step assessment 


respiratory/cardiovascular depression (hypoten¬ 
sion, arrhythmias etc.) may predominate in any 
severe poisoning. Measure paracetamol and 
salicylate levels (± lithium and iron, if indicated) 
and, if there is a strong suspicion of illicit drug 
use, perform a urine toxicology screen See 
www.npis.org or http://www.toxbase org for 
further information. 

Consider carbon monoxide poisoning. The fea¬ 
tures of CO poisoning are non-specific; the ‘classic’ 
description of cherry-red mucous membranes/ 
skin is very rare. Severe metabolic acidosis and 
ECG changes of ischaemia/infarction with 
arrhythmias and hypotension may be found. 
Some pulse oximeters can measure carboxyhae- 
moglobin (COHb), but confirm with measurement 
of COHb on arterial or venous blood sample. The 
COHb value at presentation is not a good guide 
to conscious level and the half-life of COHb (~4 
hours breathing room air) will be significantly less 
if the patient has been given oxygen. Extrapola¬ 
tion back to the time of exposure will indicate 
the peak level more accurately. 


Consider further investigation if no clear 
cause identified 

If the cause remains unclear, arrange CT brain 
and send a toxicology screen if not already per¬ 
formed. Consider hepatic encephalopathy if the 
patient has known or suspected liver disease, or 
hypertensive encephalopathy if BP is consistently 
>180/120 mmHg with hypertensive retinopathy 
or evidence of renal involvement. Otherwise, 
seek neurological and/or critical care input and 
consider MRI (brainstem pathology), EEG (non- 
convulsive sta us, hepatic encephalopathy) and 
LP (CNS infection). 

Psychogenic unresponsiveness is a diagnosis 
of exclusion, but consider it if comprehensive 
investigation fails to reveal an underlying cause 
and there are suggestive signs, e.g. response to 
tickling, resistance to passive eye opening and 
gaze deviating towards the floor in any position. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





Q Confusion: delirium and dementia 


Confusion (impaired cognition) is global impair¬ 
ment of mental function. 

Delirium is an abrupt decline in cognitive function 
that follows a fluctuating course and is accompa¬ 
nied by impaired attention, (e.g. easily distracted, 
unable to maintain focus) and disturbed conscious¬ 
ness (‘hyperalert /agitated or drowsyAlawareness). 
Common associated features include reversal of 
the sleep-wake cycle, hallucinations, delusions and 
altered emotion/psychomotor behaviour. 

Dementia is a chronic, progressive decine 
in cognitive function without disturbance of 
consciousness. 

The initial challenge with confused patients is 
finding them (sometimes literally). Agitated, rest¬ 
less patients rapidly attract attention but those 
with ‘hypoactive delirium’ are quiet, withdrawn and 
easily missed. In patients with pre-existing demen¬ 
tia, delirium may be overlooked unless baseline 
cognitive function is established. It is also pos¬ 
sible to mislabel dysphasic, deaf or depressed 
patients as confused. 


Delirium 


The differential diagnosis of delirium is wide and, 
in patients with a ‘vulnerable brain’ (Box 8.1), 
includes almost any acute physical, mental or 
environmental insult. Causes are listed below; 
those shown in bold are unlikely to be solely 
responsible for delirium, except in patients with 
a ‘vulnerable brain’. 

Drugs 

• Alcohol*. 

• Opioids* 

• Benzodiazepines*. 

• An iconvulsants. 

• Tricyclic antidepressants*. 

• Anticholinergics. 

• Antihistamines. 

• Antipsychotics*. 


• Lithium. 

• Corticosteroids (especially high-dose). 

• Baclofen. 

• Levodopa/dopamine agonists. 

• Digoxin. 

*indicates that confusion may arise from either 
drug effects or withdrawal. 

Metabolic/physiological disturbance 

• Hypoxia. 

• Hypercapnia. 

• Shock. 

• Hypo/hyperthermia. 

• Hypo/hyperglycaemia. 

• Hyponatraemia. 

• Hypo/hypercalcaemia. 

• Dehydration 

• Uraemia. 

• Metabolic acidosis. 

• Hepatic encephalopathy. 

• Hypo/hyperthyroidism. 

Infection 

• CNS infection: 

• meningitis (bacterial, viral, fungal, 
tuberculosis) 

• encephalitis 

• cerebral abscess 

• cerebral malaria. 

• Non-CNS infection: 

• sepsis 

• pneumonia 

• urinary tract 

• biliary/intra-abdominal 

• endocarditis. 

Intracranial causes 

• Seizures (post-ictal state). 

• Haemorrhage. 

• Space-occupying lesion. 

• Head injury. 

• Tintracranial pressure. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 














CONFUSION: DELIRIUM AND DEMENTIA 


Differential diagnosis 


Box 8.1 Delirium and the ‘vulnerable brain’ 


When assessing delirium, consider predisposing factors, as 
well as acute precipitants. Elderly patients (especially >80 
years) and those with pre-existing cognitive impairment 
(diagnosed or undiagnosed), frailty, multiple sensory 
deficits, chronic alcohol excess or any significant underlying 
brain disorder, e.g. cerebrovascular disease, Parkinson’s 
disease, multiple sclerosis have a reduced threshold for 
developing delirium. These patients have a 'vulnerable 
brain' and delirium may result from relatively minor insults 
that would not normally impair cognitive function in healthy 
patients without such predisposing factors. 


Other causes 

• Pain. 

• Postoperative. 

• Constipation. 

• Urinary retention. 

• Acute abdominal pathology (pancreatitis, 
appendicitis). 

• Myocardial infarction. 

• Carbon monoxide. 

• Acute thiamine deficiency (Wernicke’s 
encephalopathy). 

• Paraneoplastic syndromes. 

• Cerebral vasculi is 

• Acute intermittent porphyria. 

• Heavy metal poisoning, e.g. lead, arsenic. 

• Unusual stimuli and sensory impairment. 


Dementia/chronic cognitive 
impairment 


Common causes 

• Alzheimer’s disease. 

• Vascular disease. 

• Lewy body dementia. 


‘Reversible’ causes 

• Vitamin B 12 /folate deficiency. 

• Subdural haemorrhage. 

• Hypothyroidism. 

• Normal pressure hydrocephalus. 

• HIV. 

• Neurosyphilis. 

• Wilson’s disease. 

Other causes 

• Frontotemporal dementias. 

• Korsakoff’s psychosis. 

• Multiple sclerosis. 

• Progressive multifocal 
leucoencephalopathy. 

• Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis. 

• (Variant) Creutzfeldt-Jakob 
disease. 

• Huntington’s disease. 


Disorders that may mimic 
confusion 


• Depression. 

• Dysphasia. 

• Deafness. 

• Acute psychosis. 

• Behavioural disturbance. 

• Amnesic syndromes. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 






















CONFUSION: DELIRIUM AND DEMENTIA 


Confusion: overview 


Full clinical assessment, collateral history, AMT (Box 2.4) & 4-AT test (Box 8.2) 


1 Normal cognitive function? 


Y es t Consider depression/dysphasia/deafness 
behavioural disturbance 


No 


2 Normal baseline cognitive function? 


Yes 


Go to Delirium 

-► Likely delirium -► (p. 82) 


No 


Acute icognitive function, fluctuating 

Yes 

Likely delirium with 

course, altered consciousness/attention? 


underlying dementia 


Go to Delirium 


No ■*- 


T Mood/motivation/enjoyment, or 
Geriatric Depression Scale score >4? 


Yes 


Consider treatment 

-► Possible depression -► and/or expert 

assessment 


No 


5 Likely dementia 


Go to further assessment 
---► of chronic confusion 
(p. 89) 



Clinical tool 

The 4AT: rapid assessment test for delirium and cognitive impairment 

The 4AT is a validated, sensitive tool for diagnosing 

[3] Attention 

delirium. It contains four elements. Scored as follows: 

Ask the patient to recite the months of the year in 

>4: possible delirium +/- cognitive impairment 

backwards order, starting at December. One prompt is 

1-3: possible cognitive impairment 

permitted to assist initial understanding. 

0: delirium or cognitive impairment unlikely (but delirium 

Achieves 7 months or more correctly 0 

still possible if [4] information incomplete) 

Starts but scores <7 months/refuses to start 1 
Untestable (cannot start because unwell, drowsy, 

[1] Alertness 

inattentive) 2 

Normal 0 


Mild sleepiness for <10 seconds after waking, then 

[4] Acute change or fluctuating course 

normal 0 

Is there evidence of significant change or fluctuation 

Clearly abnormal 4 

in alertness/cognition/other mental function, e.g. 

This includes patients who are drowsy, or agitated/ 

paranoia/hallucinations arising over last 2 weeks and 

hyperactive. Attempt to rouse with speech or gentle touch. 

still evident in last 24 hours 

No 0 

[2] AMT4 

Yes 4 

Age, date of birth, place (name of hospital or building), 


current year 


No mistakes 0 


1 mistake 1 


2 or more mistakes/untestable 2 



downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 











































CONFUSION: DELIRIUM AND DEMENTIA 


Confusion: step-by-step assessment 


1 Normal cognitive function? 

Disorientation, forgetfulness and muddled think¬ 
ing may be apparent from normal conversation 
but confirm with an objective assessment, e.g. 
the abbreviated mental test (AMT; Box 2.4, 
p. 14) or mini-mental state examination (MMSE). 
Use these tools to screen for confusion in all 
patients with a ‘vulnerable brain (Box 8.1). 
Ensure that apparent cognitive impairment is 
not due to communication problems (deafness, 
dysarthria, language barriers) or an isolated 
disorder of comprehension (receptive dysphasia), 
word-finding difficulty (expressive dysphasia), 
memory (amnesic syndrome), behaviour or mood. 
Patients with depression often score poorly 
in formal testing through refusal to volunteer 
answers rather than making mistakes - if these 
patients are encouraged (or treated), performance 
may improve. 


2 


Normal baseline cognitive function? 


Establish baseline cognitive function and any 
recent change in mental status by speaking to 
relatives/friends/carers and checking previous 
cognitive assessments. Thorough questioning is 
important as relatives may have the impression 
that baseline cognition was normal - as the 
patient was in a familiar environment, seeing 
familiar people talking about familiar topics and 
not being pressed on recent events - even if 
baseline cognition was, in fact, impaired. 


Acute icognitive function, fluctuating 
J course, altered consciousness/attention? 

Use the 4AT assessment test (Clinical tool, p. 80) 
to diagnose delirium. Having established baseline 
cognitive function, look for any evidence of an 


acute change. Spend time speaking with the 
patient and observing behaviour. In addition to 
direct observation, seek evidence of fluctuation 
through discussion with nursing staff or review 
of overnight reports. Delirium is frequently 
superimposed on dementia (acute on chronic 
confusion) - look for important clues such as 
sudden decline in cognitive abilities, alteration of 
consciousness, fluctuating course and difficulty 
concentrating. 


4 


iMood/motivation/enjoyment, or 
Geriatric Depression Scale score >4? 


8 


Depression can mimic or exacerbate dementia. 
Ask patients if they feel low in mood but also 
enquire about things they take pleasure in (do 
they still enjoy them?), as well as biological 
symptoms (early morning waking, ^appetite, 
^weight). During conversation, note expressions 
of guilt, worthlessness, pessimism and other 
negative thoughts (especially if exaggerated or 
incongruent with circumstances) and look for 
psychomotor retardation, lack of depth or variety 
in affect, and poor eye contact. Scoring systems, 
e.g. the geriatric depression scale (GDS), may 
assist diagnosis, if uncertain, refer for specialist 
evaluation or reassess after a trial of treatment. 


5 


Likely dementia 


There is no absolute division between acute and 
chronic confusion in terms of timing or causes. Even 
if the cause has been removed, it can take many 
weeks for a delirium to resolve fully. Further, chronic 
confusion can fluctuate. However, if confusion has 
persisted for >12 weeks without an obvious acute 
cause or evidence of improvement, see ‘Further 
assessment of chronic confusion' (p. 89). 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















CONFUSION: DELIRIUM AND DEMENTIA 


Delirium: overview 




4 


5 


6 


Metabolic disturbance? 


Yes 

——► 


Correct and reassess - Seek underlying cause 


No 


Likely drug toxicity? 

Yes 



No 

' 


Alcohol excess/dependence? 


Yes 


♦ 


Collateral history; toxicology screen/drug levels 
Consider discontinuation/dose adjustment/antidote 


Consider intoxication/withdrawal/ 
Wernicke’s encephalopathy 


No 


Known or suspected liver disease? 

Yes 


1 

No 

' 


Consider hepatic encephalopathy 


Baseline cognitive impairment or 
Tsusceptibility to delirium? 


Yes 


-► See Delirium in the vulnerable brain (p. 86) 


No 


9 Evidence or high risk of infection? 


Yes 


Must exclude CNS infection 


No 


10 


Neuroimaging and toxicology screen if not already performed 
Review environmental exposures; reconsider alcohol withdrawal 
Neurology ± Psychiatry review 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 






























































CONFUSION: DELIRIUM AND DEMENTIA 


Delirium: step-by-step assessment 


1 Capillary BG <3.0/deranged physiology? 

Evaluate and treat respiratory failure (Ch. 12), 
shock (Ch. 30), depressed consciousness (Ch 
7), hypothermia and seizure (Ch. 31) before con¬ 
sidering other causes of delirium. Exclude new or 
worsening hypercapnia in any patient with chronic 
type 2 respiratory failure or significant chronic 
lung disease. If the capillary BG is <3 0 mmol/L, 
send blood for laboratory glucose measurement 
but treat immediately, without waiting for the 
result. Reassess if confusion persists despite 
effective correction 


2 


Suspect meningitis? 


Assume meningitis/encephalitis if the patient 
has meningism (Box 18.2, p. 169), a purpuric 
rash or a febrile illness with headache, seizures, 
focal neurological signs or no obvious alternative 
source. Take blood cultures and throat swabs 
and give empirical IV antibiotics immediately. If 
there are no contraindications, perform an LP 
(p. 170). Request CT prior to LP if seizure, focal 
neurological signs, GCS <15 or papilloedema. 


3 


High risk of intracranial pathology? 


Consider urgent CT brain to exclude a structural 
CNS cause if any of the following are present: 

• new focal neurological signs or ataxia 

• first seizure 

• drowsiness (if you suspect opioid toxicity, 
give a trial of naloxone before CT) 

• recent head injury 

• sudden severe headache 

• any fall/trauma in a patient on 
anticoagulation. 

In patients with active malignancy, immunosup¬ 
pression or recent falls, look for other causes 
of delirium, but have a low threshold for early 
neuroimaging to exclude intracranial metastases/ 
abscess/haemorrhage. 


4 


Metabo ic disturbance? 


Review blood chemistry for metabolic distur¬ 
bance check laboratory glucose, even if capillary 
BG is within the normal range. The healthy brain 
is relatively resistant to metabolic insult so do not 
attribute confusion solely to modest biochemical 
derangement. However, delirium is likely to be 


explained by hypoglycaemia, hypothyroidism or, 
if severe: dehydration, acidosis, iNa + (especially 
<120 mmol/L), TCa 2+ (>3.0 mmol/L) or hyper- 
glycaemia, e.g. hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic 
state (p. 297 [Ch. 34]). Uraemia is an unusual 
cause of acute confusion in the non vulnerable 
brain but may result in toxic accumulation of 
medication. 

The vulnerable brain is more sensitive to 
metabolic derangement - even mild dehydration, 
renal impairment or glycaemic/electrolyte/thyroid 
disturbance may impair cognition. Correct any 
disturbances but continue to search for additional 
contributing factors. 

See ‘Further assessment of hyponatraemia’ 
(p. 88) in any patient with unexplained -lNa + . 


8 


Likely drug toxicity? 


| Illicit drug use or poisoning 

Substance abuse is a common cause of acute 
confusion/psychosis in younger patients. If it is 
suspected, use all available sources of infor¬ 
mation to establish what has been taken and 
when. Look for characteristic clinical features of 
toxicity (see Table 7.2, p. 76) and consider a 
urine toxicology screen. See www.npis.org for 
further information. Give naloxone in patients with 
features of acute opioid toxicity - a response 
should occur within seconds to minutes; observe 
closely for symptoms of acute opioid withdrawal 
(sweating, tremor, agitation, seizures). 


Prescribed medication 

Anticonvulsants, lithium, sedatives and opioids 
can cause confusion, even in healthy brains. 
Many other drugs may precipitate delirium in 
the vulnerable brain (see Box 8.1), especially 
tricyclic antidepressants, anticholinergics, e.g. 
oxybutynin, antipsychotics and antihistamines. 
Even if they are normally well tolerated, these 
agents may contribute to delirium in the context 
of other acute insults. Benzodiazepines can have 
a paradoxical effect, worsening confusion and 
agitation. Abrupt withdrawal of benzodiazepines 
and opioids can also precipitate delirium, often 
several days after stopping. 

Verify all drugs and dosages with the patient/ 
relatives/carers. Check how frequently PRN 
medications, especially benzodiazepines and 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
















CONFUSION: DELIRIUM AND DEMENTIA 


Delirium: step-by-step assessment 


opioids, are used at home and ensure they 
have not been inadvertently omitted, reduced 
or reinstated in hospital. Consider a trial cessation 
or idose of any drug with potential CNS side 
effects (see Table 7.2, p. 76), especially if recently 
introduced or increased. Weigh the likelihood of 
toxicity against ongoing treatment benefit and 
predictable problems on discontinuation. Where 
necessary, taper the dose gradually to avoid 
withdrawal symptoms. 


if first fit, focal neurological signs or evidence 
of head injury. 

Wernicke’s encephalopathy 

Consider thiamine deficiency and the need 
for supplementation in all patients with acute 
confusion on a background of chronic alcohol 
excess. Give immediate IV thiamine if there is 
short-term memory loss, diplopia, gaze palsy, 
nystagmus, ataxia or severe malnutrition. 


Alcohol excess/dependence? 


Acute alcohol intoxication 

Acute alcohol intoxication is the most common 
cause of altered mental status in the emergency 
department but may coexist with other pathology, 
e.g. head injury, liver injury, nutritional deficiency. 
Confirm the presence of alcohol with breath or 
blood tests but always search for additional 
causes of confusion. 


Alcohol withdrawal 

This may present early, e.g. 6-12 hours after 
cessation of drinking, or late, e.g. 2-3 days after 
hospital admission. Typcal symptoms include 
confusion, agitation, hallucinations and adrenergic 
over-stimulation (tremor, sweating, tachycardia). 
The diagnosis is obvious in patients with a 
florid presentation and clear history of alcohol 
excess/dependence but consider it in all cases 
of unexplained delirium. Screen all patients for 
alcohol problems (Box 2.1 , p. 11), identify elderly 
patients with subtle alcohol dependence, e.g. 
‘large’ daily sherry. If in doubt, obtain a collateral 
history and look for an isolated increase in GGT/ 
mean cell volume. Seizures may complicate 
severe withdrawal but consider neuroimaging 


7 


Known or suspected liver disease? 


Suspect hepatic encephalopathy in any patient 
with an existing diagnosis or clinical features of 
cirrhosis. Constructional apraxia (inability to draw 
a star) and/or asterixis (Fig. 1 9.1 , p. 1 80), together 
with the absence of florid hallucinations/adrenergic 
features may differentiate hepatic encephalopathy 
from alcohol withdrawal in patients wi h alcoholic 
liver disease. If you suspect encephalopathy, 
seek and treat potential precipitants, including 
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (an ascitic tap 
is mandatory if ascites is present), other infections, 
dehydration, constipation, subclinical Gl bleeding 
and drugs with CNS toxicity. 

Consider acute liver failure and seek urgent 
expert advice in patients without cirrhosis 
who have jaundice and very high ALT or TPT. 
Perform an ABG to exclude hypercapnia if there 
is asterixis without features of liver disease. 


Baseline cognitive impairment or 
Tsusceptibility to delirium? 


The diagnostic approach now depends on the 
underlying threshold for developing delirium. If 
any feature in Box 8.1 is present, proceed to 
‘Delirium in the vulnerable brain: overview of further 
assessment’. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













CONFUSION: DELIRIUM AND DEMENTIA 


Delirium: step by-step assessment 


9 


Evidence or high risk of infection? 


Suspect CNS infection in patients with 
Ttemperature/WBC/CRP or Tsusceptibility 
(foreign travel, immunosuppression, animal bite). 
Do not attribute confusion to minor non-CNS 
infections. 

Seek urgent input from an ID unit if the patient 
has recently travelled to the developing world, 
has received an animal or tick bite, is HIV-positive 
or is taking immunosuppressive therapy, e.g. 
long-term steroids, chemotherapy. Send blood 
for thick and thin films if travel to a malaria- 
endemic region has been undertaken within 
the last 3 months Otherwise, undertake LP to 
exclude CNS infection. 

If CNS infection has been excluded, treat any 
other apparent source of infection but continue 
to search for additional causes of confusion. 


10 


Neuroimaging and toxicology screen. 
Consider other causes. Neurology ± 
Psychiatry review 


If not already carried out, perform neuroimaging 
and LP to exclude CNS infection and structural 


disease. If CT is non-diagnostic, consider MRI 
brain. Check carboxyhaemoglobin levels for 
carbon monoxide toxicity if there is associated 
headache or if the patient has been exposed to 
smoke/exhaust fumes (though levels may cor¬ 
relate poorly with symptoms). Measure urinary 
porphyrins (liaising with the biochemistry labora¬ 
tory in advance), especially if there is associated 
abdominal pain. Test for HIV. 

If the cause is still not apparent, seek expert 
neurological ± psychiatric input. EEG may assist in 
the diagnosis of atypical seizures, toxic encepha¬ 
lopathies or unusual neurodegenerative diseases. 
Other tests to consider include autoimmune/ 
vasculitis antibodies (cerebral vasculitis?), syphilis/ 
Lyme disease serology, antineuronal antibodies 
(paraneoplastic syndrome?) and heavy metal 
levels in blood and urine. 


8 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 









CONFUSION: DELIRIUM AND DEMENTIA 


Delirium in ‘vulnerable brain’: overview 


1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 



downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 























CONFUSION: DELIRIUM AND DEMENTIA 


Delirium in ‘vulnerable brain’: step-by-step assessment 


Likely sou ce of infection or systemic 
inflammatory response? 

In the vulnerable brain, even minor infections can 
trigger delirium. Infections may present ‘atypically’ 
lacking characteristic symptoms and signs. 

In patients with Ttemperature/WBC/CRP, take 
blood cultures and look for a septic focus (p. 
1 42). Also consider atypical presentations of acute 
abdominal pathologies, e.g. perforation, pan¬ 
creatitis, appendicitis, cholecystitis or diverticulitis. 
Re-examine regularly, check amylase and have a 
low threshold for abdominal imaging - especially 
if there is any pain/tenderness or deranged LFTs. 
Consider LP if the source remains elusive. 

Even in the absence of Ttemperature/WBC/ 
CRP, consider empirical antibiotic treatment if 
there s a convincing focus of infection, e.g. 
positive MSU or new purulent sputum, but 
weigh the likelihood of bacterial infection against 
complications such as Gl upset or Clostridium 
difficile diarrhoea. 


2 


Pain present? 


Pain can cause or contribute to delirium in the 
vulnerable brain and may be difficult to assess 
if the patient is agitated or muddled. Wherever 
possible, identify and treat the underlying cause 
using simple analgesia/non-pharmacological 
measures as first-line treatment but do not leave 
patients in distress. Where opioids are required, 
carefu ly up-titrate and monitor. 


3 


Clinical or ECG evidence of acute 
cardiac disorder? 


Occasionally, myocardial infarction (Ml) presents 
as delirium. Seek urgent cardiology input if the 
ECG meets the criteria for ST elevation Ml. 


Check troponin and assess further for acute 
coronary syndrome if there are other indicative 
ECG changes (p. 51). Cardiac failure may con¬ 
tribute to delirium through hypoxia or cerebral 
hypoperfusion. Avoid hypotension where possible 
(review medication) and correct hypoxia and 
anaemia. Treat any brady- or tachyarrhythmias 
and consider diuretic if there is fluid overload. 


4-6 


Palpable bladder/Constipated/Sensory 
impairment? 


Actively look for and treat urinary retention, constipa¬ 
tion and nutritional deficiency (including B 12 /folate). 
If a urinary catheter is required, it may be possible 
to withhold anticholinergic drugs for detrusor 
instability. Patients with moderate to severe demen¬ 
tia are at high risk of becoming acutely confused 
when presented with unusual surroundings, 
people and stimuli. Provide frequent reassurance 
and reorientation, encourage visits from family 
members, check that patients have their normal 
glasses and hearing aids, and ensure adequate 
lighting. 


8 


7 


Consider other causes. Neuroimaging. 
Establish baseline function 


In the absence of another indication for brain 
imaging, it may be reasonable to persevere with 
the above measures for several days. However, 
arrange CT brain to exclude subdural haem¬ 
orrhage and other structural pathology if the 
patient fails to improve or deteriorates. Review 
medications daily and reassess regular y for 
pain, metabolic disturbance or infection. Make 
a detailed assessment of baseline cognitive 
ability and level of function Finally, consider 
rarer causes, as described for the non-vulnerable 
brain. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
















CONFUSION: DELIRIUM AND DEMENTIA 


Confusion: further assessment 


Further assessment of hyponatraemia 

Step 1 Confirm true hyponatraemia 

Apparent hyponatraemia may result from drip 
arm contamination, laboratory/labelling error, or 
‘pseudohyponatraemia’ due to hyperlipidaemia, 
hyperproteinaemia, hyperglycaemia or high 
plasma ethanol. Check plasma osmolality (usually 
normal in pseudohyponatraemia) and recheck 
Na + if the result appears spurious. 

Step 2 Estimate the rate of Na‘ decline 

A rapid I in plasma Na + may lead to life- 
threatening cerebral oedema, and requires 
prompt correction. In contrast a gradual I in Na + 
allows osmotic adaptation by cerebral neurons 
and rapid correction may lead to irreversible and 
brainstem damage (central pontine myelinolysis). 

It is therefore critical to distinguish acute (<72 
hours) from chronic (>72 hours) hyponatraemia 
Suspect chronic if any of the following features 
is present: 

• recent U+E results demonstrating a 
progressive decline in plasma Na + 

• slowly progressive onset of symptoms, e.g. 
anorexia, lethargy, confusion 

• asymptomatic or only mild symptoms with 
a plasma Na + <125 mmol/L 

• no clear cause for a sudden decrease in 
plasma Na + (see below). 

In these patients, correct Na + with extreme 
care Recheck U+E every 2-4 hours, and aim 
for a rise in plasma Na + of <8 mmol/day. 
Suspect acute hyponatraemia if: 

• abrupt onset of symptoms within the last 
48 hours OR 

• major symptoms (severe confusion, 4- GCS, 
seizures) with Na + > 120 mmol/L, 

especially with a history of sudden increase in free 
water intake, e.g., excessK/e IV dextrose administra¬ 
tion (especially postoperatively) or polydipsia. 

If you suspect acute hyponatraemia, seek 
urgent expert advice but, in an emergency, aim 
to increase plasma Na + by 4-6 mmol/L over 1-2 
hours then reassess. 

Step 3 Assess volume status 

Clear evidence of either t or 4, EOF volume is 
very helpful in determining the underlying cause. 
Categorize the patient as: 

• ‘hypervolaemic’ if there is evidence of fluid 
overload, e.g. oedema, TJVP, ascites 


• ‘hypovolaemic’ if there is evidence of fluid 
depletion, e.g. dry mucous membranes, 
4-skin turgor, thirst, 4JVP 

• ‘euvolaemic’ if neither of the above are 
present. 

The most common causes of hypervolaemic 
hyponatraemia are cardiac failure, cirrhosis, 
oliguric renal failure and nephrotic syndrome. If 
the cause is not obvious, check for proteinuria, 
perform an echocardiogram and assess for 
evidence of cirrhosis (p. 176). 

In hypovolaemic hyponatraemia there is Na + 
and water depletion, with relatively greater Na + 
loss. The most common causes are excessive 
diuretic therapy and acute diarrhoea/vomiting. 

If the source of Na + and water loss is not 
obvious, measure urine sodium. The normal 
response of the kidneys to salt and water 
depletion is to minimize Na + excretion If urine 
Na + is appropriately low (<20 mmol/L), suspect 
Gl tract losses, e.g. diarrhoea, vomiting or ‘third 
space’ losses, e.g. pancreatitis, burns. If urine 
Na + is (>20 mmol/L), then there is a contribution 
to salt and water depletion from renal losses, 
e.g. adrenal insufficiency, renal tubular acidosis 
or ‘salt-wasting’ renal disease. 

Step 4 If euvolaemic, or if cause unclear, measure 
urine sodium and osmolality 

If feasible, discontinue any diuretics for 10 days 
and recheck U+E alongside plasma and urine 
osmolality and urine Na + . 

Low urine Na + (<20 mmol/L) implies that 
4plasma Na + is not due to excessive renal 
Na + losses. The cause may be hypovolaemic 
hyponatraemia due to extra-renal losses (see 
above) but without obvious clinical manifestations 
of hypovolaemia. In this case, urine osmolality 
will be T (>150 mmol/kg) due to the presence of 
other solutes. If urine osmolality is <150 mmol/ 
kg, the likely cause is excessive water intake. In 
hospitalized patients check for recent administra¬ 
tion of hypotonic IV fluids, e.g. 5% dextrose. In 
non-hospitalized patients consider psychogenic 
polydipsia. 

If hyponatraemia is accompanied by Turine 
Na + (>20 mmol/L) and osmolality (>150 mmol/ 
kg), consider diuretic use, adrenal insufficiency, 
hypothyroidism, salt-wasting renal disease and the 
syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion (SIADH). 

Check TFTs and a 9 a.m cortisol. High or 
high-normal plasma urea/uric acid may indicate 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





CONFUSION: DELIRIUM AND DEMENTIA 


Confusion: further assessment 


subtle -lECF volume; if present, consider 
salt-wasting diseases or occult diuretic use. 
Otherwise, the likely diagnosis is SIADH. 

If you suspect SIADH, look for an underlying 
cause (Box 8.2). Consider trial cessation of any 
suspected causative agent. If the cause remains 
unclear, request a CXR and CT brain and assess 
the response to fluid restriction (<1 IVday). 

Further assessment of chronic confusion 

The approach to progressive cognitive decline 
over a period of months to years differs from 
the approach to acute confusion. Exclude the 
reversible causes from p. 79 with a CT brain and 
blood tests; if no reversible cause is identified, 
refer for specialist evaluation and care. 


Box 8.2 Causes of SIADH 


• Tumours, especially small-cell lung cancer 

• CNS disorders: stroke, trauma, infection 

• Pulmonary disorders, e.g. pneumonia, tuberculosis 

• Drugs 

Anticonvulsants, e.g. carbamazepine 
Psychotropics, e.g. haloperidol 
Antidepressants, e.g. fluoxetine 
Cytotoxics, e.g. cyclophosphamide 
Hypoglycaemics, e.g. chlorpropamide 
Opioids, e.g morphine 
Proton-pump inhibitors, e.g. omeprazole 

• Sustained pain, stress, nausea, e.g. postoperative 
state 

• Acute porphyria 

• Idiopathic 


Consider psychiatric illness 

Perform an objective measure of cognition 
(at least MMSE) to ensure the presentation fits 
with a chronic decline in cognition dementia. 
Depression can mimic or exacerbate dementia 
and may be difficult to diagnose. Consider using 
tools such as the Cornell scale to assist diag¬ 
nosis and, if you suspect depression, reassess 
cognitive function after a trial of anti-depressant 
therapy. 


Assess for reversible causes 

Perform a CT brain in every patient with chronic 
confusion. This may identify reversible causes, 
e.g. subdural haemorrhage or normal pressure 
hydrocephalus (ataxia and incontinence should 
raise the index of suspicion), or suggest pos¬ 
sible aetiological factors, e.g. vascular disease 
Measure TFTs in all patients, as hypothyroidism 
can present as dementia and responds to treat¬ 
ment. Take a careful alcohol history and consider 
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome in any patient with 
chronic alcohol misuse. Look for and correct 
nutritional deficiencies, e.g. B 12 , folate. 


8 


Consider rare causes 

Perform a more intensive work-up if the patient 
has an unusual pattern of cognitive impairment, 
e.g. preserved recent memory or personality/ 
speech change, unexplained neurological find¬ 
ings on examination, a rapid course of cognitive 
decline or onset at a young age. This should 
usually include an HIV test, copper studies, Lyme/ 
syphilis serology, MRI brain and LP ± further 
specialist assessment, e.g. EEG. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 











Q Diarrhoea 


Diarrhoea may be defined as the passage of >3 
loose or liquid stools/day. Patients often have 
difficulty describing their stools. The Bristol Stool 
Form Scale https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health- 
information/health-communication-programs/ 
bowel-contro awareness-campaign/Documents/ 
BristoLStool_Form_Scale_508.pdf can be helpful. 
The differential diagnosis depends on symptom 
duration. Acute diarrhoea (<2 weeks) is usually 
infectious but occasionally is due to drugs or a 
first presentation of inflammatory bowel disease. 
Chronic/relapsing diarrhoea may reflect colorectal 
cancer or inflammatory bowel disease, but the 
most frequent cause is irritable bowel syndrome. 

Infectious diarrhoea 

Infectious diarrhoea is due to faecal-oral trans¬ 
mission of viruses, bacteria, bacterial toxins or 
parasites. Most cases are self-limiting and a 
pathogen is rarely identified. Viruses and toxins 
predominantly affect the stomach and small 
bowel, causing large-volume, watery diarrhoea 
and pronounced vomiting; in toxin-mediated 
diarrhoea, e.g. Staphylococcus aureus, the 
incubation period is typically <12 hours. Invasive 
intestinal pathogens, including certain strains of 
Escherichia coli, and Shigella, may cause bloody 
diarrhoea, often with severe abdominal cramps 
and systemic upset (dysentery). Clostridium 
difficile infection (CDI) is an important cause of 
hospital-acquired diarrhoea, especially following 
broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy; CDI ranges 
from mild diarrhoeal illness to life-threatening 
pseudomembranous colitis. Diarrhoea that 
persists for >10 days is unlikely to be infective, 
but consider protozoal infections, e.g. giardiasis, 
amoebiasis or Cryptosporidium infection, in 
patients who are immunocompromised or have 
ecently travelled to the tropics. 


Irritable bowel syndrome 

Irritable bowel syndrome is the most common 
cause of chronic diarrhoea. The predominant 
bowel habit may alternate between diarrhoea 
and constipation, and diagnosis is based on 
typical clinical features (Box 9.1) in the absence 
of apparent organic disease. Symptoms tend to 
follow a relapsing and remitting course, often 
exacerbated by psychosocial stress 

Drugs 

Many drugs, including numerous over-the- 
counter preparations, cause diarrhoea (Box 9.2). 

Colorectal cancer 

Colorectal cancer may present with diarrhoea, 
especially if left-sided/distal. Suggestive features 
include weight loss, rectal bleeding, a palpable 
mass or ron-deficiency anaemia, but the absence 
of these features DOES NOT exclude malignancy. 


Box 9.1 Rome III criteria for diagnosis of 
irritable bowel syndrome 


Recurrent abdominal pain or discomfort on at least 3 
days per month during the previous 3 months that is 
associated with two or more of the following: 

• relieved by defecation 

• onset associated with a change in stool frequency 

• onset associated with a change in stool form or 
appearance. 

Supporting symptoms include: 

• altered stool frequency 

• altered stool form 

• altered stool passage (straining and/or urgency) 

• mucorrhoea 

• abdominal bloating or subjective distension. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















DIARRHOEA 


Differential diagnosis 


Box 9.2 Drugs that frequently cause diarrhoea 


• Laxatives (including occult laxative abuse) 

• Antibiotics (especially macrolides) 

• Alcohol (especially chronic alcohol excess) 

• NSAIDs 

• Metformin 

• Colchicine 

• Orlistat (steatorrhoea) 

• Proton pump inhibitors 

• SSRIs 

• Nicorandil 

• Cytotoxic agents 


The diagnosis must be considered in any patient 
>45 years with new-onset, persistent diarrhoea 
and is usually confirmed by colonoscopy with 
biopsy. 

Inflammatory bowel disease 

Ulcerative colitis (UC) is confined to the large 
bowel and typically presents with bloody diar¬ 
rhoea and cramping lower abdominal pain ± 
tenesmus, mucus discharge, fever and constitu¬ 
tional upset. Crohn’s disease can affect any part 
of the alimentary tract and may present with large 
bowel symptoms simi ar to those of UC, or with 
small bowel symptoms, e.g. watery, non-bloody 
diarrhoea accompanied by abdominal pain and 
weight loss Both disorders are associated with 
a range of extra-intestinal features (Box 9.3). 


Box 9.3 Extra-intestinal features of 
inflammatory bowel disease 


• General: fever, malaise, weight loss 

• Eyes: conjunctivitis, episcleritis, iritis 

• Joints: arthralgia of large joints, sacroiliitis/ankylosing 
spondylitis 

• Skin: mouth ulcers, erythema nodosum, pyoderma 
gangrenosum 

• Liver: fatty liver, gallstones, sclerosing cholangitis, 
cholangiocarcinoma (ulcerative colitis) 


9 


Disorders causing malabsorption 

Fat malabsorption causes pale, greasy, offen¬ 
sive stools that float and are difficult to flush 
(steatorrhoea). Other features of malabsorption 
include undigested foodstuffs in stool, weight 
loss, bloating and nutritional deficiencies. The 
usual underlying cause is small bowel disease, 
e.g. coeliac disease, Crohn’s disease, tropical 
sprue, lymphoma, small bowel resection or 
pancreatic insufficiency. 

Other causes 

• Diverticulitis, ischaemic colitis. 

• Hyperthyroidism, autonomic neuropathy. 

• Carcinoid tumour, gastrinoma, VIPoma. 

• Severe constipation with overflow. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



















DIARRHOEA 


Acute diarrhoea: overview 


Full clinical assessment, rectal exam ± stool culture 


1 Assess resuscitation requirements and illness severity. 


Yes 


2 Bloody diarrhoea? 


No 


3 Risk of C. difficile nfection? 


No 


Y es Consider dysentery, diverticulitis, ischaemic 
colitis, inflammatory bowel disease 


Yes Urgent stool for 

-► C. difficile toxin ± 

empirical treatment 


C. difficile infection 


5 Likely drug culprit? 


No 


Risk of protozoal infection? 

Yes 


J 

No «... 


cysts and parasites 


Y es ( Discontinue drug 
if possible 


Confirm infection 


Drug related diarrhoea 


Likely gastroenteritis 

Liaise with ID/GI if symptoms persist >10 days 


Assess resuscitation requirements and 
illness severity 

Step 1 Are there features of shock? 

Look for Thr, IBP (a late sign) or evidence of 
tissue hypoperfusion (see Box 30 1, p. 267). If 
present, provide aggressive IV fluid resuscita¬ 
tion and reassess. Although hypovolaemia from 
Gl losses is the likeliest cause of shock, also 
consider intra-abdominal SIRS/sepsis, medication 
and adrenal insufficiency (diarrhoea is a common 
feature of acute adrenal crisis). 

Step 2 Is there acute renal impairment? 

Hypovolaemia may result in severe ‘pre-renal’ 
acute kidney injury (AKI), especially if compounded 
by antihypertensive or nephrotoxic medication 
e g. diuretics, ACE inhibitors, NSAIDs. Patients 
with AKI require IV rehydration with close moni¬ 
toring of fluid balance, urine output and U+E. If 


AKI occurs in the context of bloody diarrhoea, 
look for features of haemolytic uraemic syndrome, 
e.g. iHb, ^platelets, Tbilirubin/LDH/reticulocytes. 

Step 3 Does the patient otherwise require IV fluids/ 
hospital admission? 

Patients with clinical evidence of dehydration 
(thirst, dry mucous membranes, -Iskin turgor) 
and concomitant vomiting, or those who are 
unable to match oral intake to ongoing losses 
require IV fluids 

Other features that may indicate a need for 
hospital admission include 

• fever 

• Twbc 

• bloody diarrhoea 

• abdominal tenderness/guarding/rigidity 

• frail, elderly or immunocompromised patient 

• significant comorbidity, e.g. heart/renal/ 
hepatic failure. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










































DIARRHOEA 


Acute diarrhoea: step-by-step assessment 


2 


Bloody diarrhoea? 


The frequent passage of bloody stools suggests 
either 

• infection with invasive organisms, e.g. 
Campylobacter, Shigella or Amoeba, or 
cytotoxin-producing organisms, e.g C 
difficile, E. coli 0157 OR 

• non-infectious colitis, e.g. ischaemic colitis 
inflammatory bowel disease. 

It is often difficult to differentiate dysentery from 
a first attack of inflammatory bowel disease in 
the early stages: both may be accompanied by 
abdominal pain, tenesmus, mucus, constitutional 
upset and a systemic inflammatory response 
(see Box 14 1, p. 141). 

• Send FBC, CRP and three stool samples 
in all patients, plus blood cultures if fever is 
present. 

• Test stool for C. difficile toxin (CDT) if the 
patient has risk factors (see below), severe 
systemic upset or TTWBC. 

• Liaise with the ID team and request analysis 
of stool for ova, cysts and parasites if 
recent foreign travel. 

• Request an abdominal X-ray to look for 
colonic dilatation (see Fig. 4.5B, p. 32) if 
there is abdominal tenderness/distention 
or a pronounced systemic inflammatory 
response. 

If the duration of symptoms is <7 days, 
suspect an infectious cause unless there are 
specific pointers to an alternative diagnosis 
Consider ischaemic colitis if bloody diarrhoea 
was preceded by sudden onset of left-sided 
lower abdominal pain or in any patient >50 years 
with known atherosclerotic disease or a source 
of systemic embolism, e.g. atrial fibrillation. 

Refer any patient with known inflammatory 
bowel disease, extra-intestinal manifestations (see 
Box 9.3), previous sim lar episodes or symptoms 
>7 days for specialist Gl evaluation. 

Seek an urgent surgical review if there is 
evidence of peritonism or toxic megacolon, or 
you suspect ischaemic colitis or diverticulitis. 


3 


Risk of C. difficile infection? 


Send stool for CDT in any patient who lives in an 
institution, e.g. nursing home, has recently been 
hospitalized, received antibiotics within the last 


Box 9.4 Assessing the severity of Clostridium 
difficile infection 

Mild 

WBC not elevated 
<3 episodes of loose stools/day 

Moderate 

tWBC (but <15x10 9 /L) 

3-5 loose stools/day 

Severe 

WBC >15x10 9 /L or 

Serum creatinine >50% above 


baseline or 


Temp >38.5°C or 

Evidence of severe colitis (abdominal 


or radiological signs) 

Life-threatening 

Signs of shock (p. 267) 

Partial or complete ileus 

Toxic megacolon or 

CT evidence of severe disease 

Adapted from Public Health England 2013. Updated guidance on 
the management and treatment of Clostridium difficile infection. 
Public Health England, http://www.hpa.org.uk 


3 months or is >65 years. In high-risk patients 
send >3 samples before ruling out the diagnosis. 
If C. difficile confirmed, assess severity at least 
daily (Box 9.4). 


4 


Risk of protozoal infection? 


Send three stool samples on consecutive days 
for ova, cysts and parasites in patients with a 
history of recent foreign travel, when there is 
known or suspected immunocompromised, 
e.g. chemotherapy, HIV or in men who have 
sex with men. 


5 


Likely drug culprit? 


Suspect drug-related diarrhoea if the onset of 
symptoms corresponds with initiation or Tdose 
of drug, especially those listed in Box 9.2. Seek 
an alternative explanation if diarrhoea does not 
resolve on drug discontinuation. 


6 


Likely gastroenteritis. Liaise with ID/GI if 
symptoms persist >10 days 


Most cases are self-limiting viral or toxin-mediated 
infections and do not require further investigation 
or antimicrobial treatment. If symptoms persist 
>10 days, seek specialist advice and consider 
further assessment as for chronic/relapsing 
diarrhoea (see below). 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



















DIARRHOEA 


Chronic/relapsing diarrhoea: overview 


Full clinical assessment, rectal exam ± FBC 


Hard or impacted stool in rectum? - 


Yes 


Likely overflow diarrhoea - - - ► 


Treat and 
reassess 


No 


Steatorrhoea? 


Yes 


Likely malabsorption disorder - - - ► 


Investigate 
for cause 


No 


Alarm features? 


No 


Yes ^ Urgent lower ^ Colorectal cancer, ulcerative 
bowel Investigation colitis, Crohn’s disease, other 


Likely drug culprit? 


No 


Specific infection risk? 


No 


Yes Discontinue _ „ 

-► . -► Drug-related diarrhoea 

drug if possible 


Yes 


-► Consider protozoa, HIV, C. difficile 


FBC, U+E, LFTs, TFTs, Ca 2+ , CRP, ESR, coeliac serology ± ferritin, B 12 , folate 


Clinical or laboratory features 

Yes 

suggesting organic disease? 



No 

' 



Further investigation ± refer Gl 


Likely functional disorder, e.g. irritable bowel syndrome 

Reassess or refer Gl if persistent troublesome symptoms/organic features 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 












































DIARRHOEA 


Chronic/relapsing diarrhoea: step-by-step assessment 


1 Hard or impacted stool in rectum? 

Have a high index of suspicion for overflow diar¬ 
rhoea in frail, immobile or confused elderly patients 
Always do a rectal examination. If the stool is 
hard or impacted, treat with faecal softeners and 
laxatives, then reassess. If the rectal examination 
is normal, overflow diarrhoea is unlikely (90% of 
impactions are rectal), but consider an abdominal 
X-ray if there is strong clinical suspicion. 


2 


Steatorrhoea? 


Steatorrhoea signifies fat malabsorption but 
its absence does not exclude a malabsorptive 
disorder. If steatorrhoea is present, ensure 
that the patient is not taking orlistat (available 
over the counter in the UK) and check coeliac 
serology and faecal elastase (iin pancreatic 
insufficiency). If -Ifaecal elastase or a strong 
suspicion of pancreatic disease, e.g. suggestive 
symptoms or cystic fibrosis, consider pancreatic 
imaging (CT/MRCP); otherwise, consider small 
bowel investigation, e.g. duodenal biopsy, MRI. 
Screen for nutritional deficiencies, e.g. iron, B 12 , 
folate, Ca 2+ , Mg 2+ , PO4 3- , albumin, in any patient 
with suspected malabsorption. 


3 


Alarm features? 


Expedite lower bowel investigation to exclude 
colorecta cancer/inflammatory bowel disease if 
the patient has persistent diarrhoea associated 
with any of the following: 

• rectal bleeding 

• palpable rectal/abdominal mass 

• weight loss 

• iron deficiency anaemia 

• new presentation in a patient >45 years. 

Consider flexible sigmoidoscopy as a first-line 
investigation in patients <45 years or colonoscopy 
if >45 years. 


4 


Likely drug culprit? 


Look for a temporal relationship between 
potential drug culprits (see Box 9.2) and the 
onset of diarrhoea. Consider trial discontinuation 
where feasible but change only one agent at any 


time and restart the drug if symptoms continue 
unaltered. Always ask about alcohol excess. 


5 


Specific infection risk? 


Exclude protozoal infection in patients with a 
history of travel to the tropics, e.g giardiasis, 
amoebiasis, or with known HIV infection/other 
immunocompromised, e.g. cryptosporidiosis - 
send three fresh stool samples for examination 
for ova cysts and parasites. Liaise with the ID 
team if stool samples are negative but there is 
ongoing clinical suspicion of infection. Test for 
HIV in any patent with chronic diarrhoea and 
risk factors. 

C difficile diarrhoea may be chronic or relaps¬ 
ing - send stool to test for CDT in any patient 
with risk factors (see above). 


9 


Clinical or laboratory features suggesting 
b organic disease? 

Screen for hyperthyroidism, hypercalcaemia and 
coeliac disease. Refer to Gl for further small 
bowel investigation if large-volume, non-bloody 
stool, previous gastric/small bowel surgery or 
evidence of nutritional deficiencies: albumin, B 12 , 
folate, Ca 2+ , Mg 2+ , P0 4 ^. 

Exclude inflammatory bowel disease if there 
is a positive family history, mouth ulcers, fever, 
TCRP/ESR or extra-intestinal manifestations (see 
Box 9.3). Refer to Gl for further evaluation if 
any of the above features is present or there 
are other findings that suggest organic disease, 
e.g. weight loss, anorexia, painless diarrhoea, 
prominent nocturnal symptoms or recent onset 
of symptoms in a patient >45 years. Faecal 
calprotectin levels can assist in the differentia¬ 
tion between inflammatory and non-inflammatory 
bowel disease. 


7 


Likely functional disorder 


If none of the above is present, a functional 
cause, e g irritable bowel syndrome, is likely - 
particularly when typical symptoms are present 
(Box 9.1). Provide reassurance and explanation 
but refer to Gl if symptoms are progressive, 
distressing or disabling. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


















1 


Dizziness 



The key to assessing dizziness lies in establish¬ 
ing the exact nature of the patient’s symptoms. 
Occasionally, transient alteration of conscious¬ 
ness or focal neurological deficit will be described 
as a dizzy turn However, most patients with 
dizziness have vertigo, light-headedness/presyn- 
cope or a sensation of unsteadiness. 

Disorders causing vertigo 

Vestibular neuronitis 

This is inflammation of the vestibular nerve, pos¬ 
sibly due to viral infection. There is abrupt onset 
of severe vertigo, associated with nausea and 
vomiting. Labyrinthine involvement (labyrinthitis) 
causes tinnitus and/or hearing impairment. 

I Benign paroxysmal positional 

vertigo (BPPV) 

BPPV is caused by particles in the semicircular 
canals which alter endolymph flow. Brief episodes 
of vertigo, typically lasting 10-60 seconds, are 
provoked by changes in head position. 

Meniere’s disease 

Recurrent attacks of vertigo, fluctuating low- 
frequency hearing loss, tinnitus and a sense of 
aural fullness are caused by increased volume 
of endolymph in the semicircular canals. 

Acoustic neuroma 

This cerebellopontine angle tumour usually pre¬ 
sents with unilateral sensorineural hearing loss. 
Vertigo may occur but is rarely the predominant 
problem. 

Brainstem pathology 

Vertigo may be due to infarction, haemorrhage, 
demyelination or a space-occupying lesion. There 
will usually be associated features of brainstem 
dysfunction, e.g. diplopia, dysarthria or cranial 
nerve palsies. Vertigo, nausea, vomiting and 


nystagmus tend to be constant and protracted. 
Vertebrobasilar transient ischaemic attacks 
(TIAs) may cause recurrent, transient episodes 
of vertigo. 

Other causes 

These include migraine-associated vertigo 
ototoxicity, e.g. gentamicin, furosemide, cisplatin 
herpes zoster oticus (Ramsay Hunt syndrome) 
and perilymphatic fistula. 

Disorders causing presyncope/ 
light-headedness 

Reflex presyncope (vasovagal episode) 

Reflex vasodilatation and/or bradycardia occur in 
response to a ‘trigger’ such as intense emotion 
or noxious stimuli, e.g. venesection. There is a 
prodrome of nausea, sweating and ‘greying-out’ 
of vision loss of peripheral vision. Syncope often 
ensues but may be averted by lying down. 

Orthostatic hypotension 

Orthostatic hypotension may result from anti¬ 
hypertensive medication, hypovolaemia (dehy¬ 
dration, blood loss) or autonomic dysfunction, 
especially in elderly or diabetic patients. 

Arrhythmia 

Brady- and tachyarrhythmia can reduce cardiac 
output and thereby compromise cerebral perfu¬ 
sion. There may be associated palpitation, ECG 
abnormalities or a cardiac history. 

Structural cardiac disease 

Severe left ventricular outflow tract obstruction, 
e g. aortic stenosis or hypertrophic obstructive 
cardiomyopathy, can result in light-headedness 
by reducing cardiac output. Episodes may be 
provoked by exertion. There will usually be abnor¬ 
malities on examination, e.g. systolic murmur, 
and ECG, e.g. left ventricular hypertrophy. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

















DIZZINESS 


Disorders causing unsteadiness 
Ataxia 

Lack of coordination of muscle movements 
may cause profound unsteadiness and difficulty 
walking; it is most commonly due to cerebellar 
pathology. 

Multisensory impairment 

Balance requires input from multiple sensory 
modalities (visual, vestibular touch, propriocep¬ 
tive); reduced function in more than one of these 
modalities, even if relatively minor, may cause 
unsteadiness. This is most often seen in the elderly. 

Weakness 

Lesions anywhere in the motor tract (cerebral 
cortex, upper motor neuron, lower motor neuron, 


Differential diagnosis 

motor endplate or muscle) can result in unsteadi¬ 
ness due to weakness. 

Other causes 

Loss of confidence, joint problems, Parkin¬ 
son’s disease and gait dyspraxia may all cause 
unsteadiness. 

Other disorders causing dizziness 

Many other conditions can cause dizziness, 
including hypoglycaemia, partial (temporal lobe) 
seizure, migraine variants, normal pressure 
hydrocephalus, hyperventilation and anxiety. 


10 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 












DIZZINESS 


Initial assessment: overview 



downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



























DIZZINESS 


Initial assessment: step-by-step assessment 


99 


1 Loss of consciousness? 

Establish this first, as loss of consciousness 
requires a different diagnostic approach (see 
Ch. 31). If at all possible, obtain an eyewitness 
account of the episode; otherwise, suspect 
transient loss of consciousness if there is a 
history of ‘coming to’ on the ground or if facial 
injuries were sustained. 


2 


Transient focal neurological deficit? 


A TIA is often described by the patient as a ‘funny 
turn’ and careful questioning may be required to 
elicit a history of transient focal neurological dis¬ 
turbance (usually <3 hours). The most common 
presentat ons include hemiparesis, hemisensory 
disturbance, facial droop, speech disturbance, 
diplop a and monocular visual loss (amaurosis 
fugax). Vertigo may occur with a vertebrobasilar 
TIA, usually accompanied by other brainstem 
features. 


3 


Illusory sense of motion? 


Vertigo is an illusory sensation of motion (usually 
spinning or rotatory). When present, it is invariably 
aggravated by movement. If the nature of the 
dizziness is not apparent from the patient’s own 
account, then ask: 'When you have dizzy spells, 
do you simply feel light-headed or do you see 
the world spin around you as if you had just 
got off a playground roundabout?' The latter 
indica es vertigo. 


Light-headedness or presyncope? 


Consider presyncope in patients who describe 
a feeling of light-headedness, ‘as if I might faint 
or pass out’, or one that is akin to the familiar 
transient sensation experienced after standing 
up quickly. If any of the episodes has been 
associated with blackout, assess as described 
for transient loss of consciousness (Ch. 31). 


5 


Sense of unsteadiness or 
impaired balance? 


In some patients with dizziness, the principal 
problem is impaired sense of balance associated 
with falls or the feeling that one might fall. This 
usually occurs while standing and is aggravated 
by walking. The patient may need to hold on 
to furniture or other people. Examination of the 
gait (p. 215) may be revealing. The underlying 
problem is often impaired central processing 
of the body’s position in space, e.g. cerebellar 
disorders, impaired proprioception, peripheral 
neuropathy, visual loss, poorly compensated 
vestibular disorders, which may be exacerbated 
by reduced muscle strength or confidence, 
particularly in the elderly. 


10 


6 


Consider other causes 


If the description of dizziness is unclear, ask for 
more details: ‘Imagine you are having one of your 
dizzy turns now. Talk me through exactly what 
happens and what you feel.’ If the account is 
not consistent with any of the above categories, 
consider alternative causes. 

• Suspect hypoglycaemic attacks if the 
patient is taking insulin or sulphonylurea 
drugs or reports relief of symptoms with 
sugar intake; a CBG and lab glucose 
measurement taken during an episode will 
confirm or exclude the diagnosis. 

• Seek neurological advice if there 
are repeated episodes of amnesia, 
altered consciousness or unusual 
behaviour. 

• In all patients with orthostatic symptoms, 
perform an FBC to exclude anaemia and 
measure erect and supine BP. 

• Anxiety is the most common cause of 
‘dizzy turns’ in patients under 65 years but 
is a diagnosis of exclusion. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
















DIZZINESS 


Vertigo: overview 


Full clinical assessment ± ENT exam and Dix-Hallp ke manoeuvre (Fig. 10.1) 


1 


Red flag features (see Box 10.1)? 

Yes 

Must exclude central lesion 



Nn _ 


■ 




New-onset sustained vertigo? 

Yes 

Likely vestibular neuronitis. Consider neuroimaging 
if atypical features or symptoms persist >2 weeks 



No 


Recurrent transient episodes y es 

provoked by changes in -► 

head position? 


Likely benign paroxysmal positional vertigo 


No 


5 


6 


7 


Recurrent episodes associated 
with hearing loss/tinnitus/ear 
fullness? 

Yes 


No 



-► Likely Meniere’s disease 


Refer for audiometry 
- - ► ± exclusion of 
acoustic neuroma 


New-onset recurrent spontaneous 

Yes 

Possible vertebrobasilar 

episodes lasting minutes? 


transient ischaemic attacks 


Urgent MRA 


No 


Associated migraine? 

Yes 



No 


► Likely migraine-associated vertigo 


Consider Meniere’s disease, ototoxicity, central lesion 

Refer ENT if persistent unexplained true vertigo 

Consider non-vertiginous causes of dizziness if atypical presentation 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

















































DIZZINESS 


Vertigo: step-by-step assessment 


101 


1 Red flag features (Box 10.1)? 

The presence of any of the features in Box 
10.1 raises the possibility of serious intracranial 
pathology. 

If the presentation is sudden, consider acute 
haemorrhagic or ischaemic stroke and arrange 
urgent neuroimaging. Where less acute, the main 
concern is to exclude intracranial mass lesion. 

CT is usually the initial imaging modality but 
MR I offers superior visualization of the posterior 
fossa. All patients with progressive sensorineural 
hearing loss require MRI to exclude acoustic 
neuroma. 


2 


New-onset sustained vertigo? 


In the absence of red flag features, new-onset 
sustained vertigo is most likely due to vestibular 
neuronitis. The usual story is of abrupt-onset 
severe vertigo with nausea and vomiting but 
without hearing loss or tinnitus. The patient has 
difficulty walking but can usually stand unsup¬ 
ported. There is unilateral nystagmus enhanced 
by asking the patient to look to the side or by 
blocking visual fixation (place a blank piece of 
paper a few inches in front of the eyes and 
inspect from the side). A positive head thrust 
test (Box 10.2) confirms the diagnosis. 


Box 10.1 Red flag features in vertigo 


• Focal neurological symptoms or signs: dysarthria, 
diplopia, facial weakness, swallowing difficulties, 
dysdiadochokinesis or focal limb weakness 

• Papilloedema, drowsiness or J.GCS 

• Inability to stand or walk 

• Atypical nystagmus (down-beating, bi-directional 
gaze evoked, pure torsional, not suppressed with 
fixation on object) 

• New-onset headache: sudden onset and severe or 
worse in morning/lying down 

• Progressive unilateral hearing loss 


Consider neuroimaging (preferably MRI) if the 
patient has a negative head thrust test, is unable 
to stand without support or has a history of 
vascular disease - primarily to exclude acute 
cerebellar stroke. 

In vestibular neuronitis, severe vertigo typically 
persists for several days and full recovery occurs 
within 3-4 weeks; reassess if symptoms persist 
beyond this period. 


3 


Recurrent transient episodes provoked by 
changes in head position? 


A history of repeated, brief episodes of vertigo 
provoked by changes in head position, e.g. 
turning over in bed or looking up, strongly 
suggests BPPV. Episodes may occur in bouts 
lasting several weeks interspersed with periods 
of remission. A positive Dix-Hallpike test (Fig. 
1 0.1) confirms the diagnosis but, even if negative, 
BPPV remains the likely diagnosis. 


Box 10.2 The head thrust test 


With intact vestibula function, changes in head position 
trigger reflex eye movements in the opposite direction 
to maintain visual fixation via the vestibulo-ocular reflex 
(V0R). The head thrust test assesses the V0R on both 
sides Stand in front of the patient, grasp his/her head in 
your hands and instruct him/her to focus on your nose. 
Turn the head as rapidly as possible to one side by 15° 
(do not perform in patients with known or suspected 
neck pathology) and observe eye movements. Failure 
to maintain fixation on the target is evidenced by the 
need for a voluntary, corrective eye movement back 
towards the target. This indicates peripheral vestibular 
dysfunction on the side to which the head was turned. 
Perform the test in both directions. Unilateral impairment 
of V0R is seen in vestibular neuronitis and excludes a 
central cause for vertigo. See the video at the website of 
the Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry: 
http://jnnp.bmj.eom/eontent/suppl/2007/09/13/ 
jnnp.2006.109512.DC1/78101113webonlymedia.mpg 


10 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



















DIZZINESS 


Vertigo: step by-step assessment 


4 


Recurrent episodes associated with 
hearing loss/tinnitus/ear fullness? 


Diagnosis of Meniere’s disease requires the 

following criteria: 

• recurrent attacks of vertigo lasting minutes 
to hours (± nausea and vomiting) 

• fluctuating sensorineural hearing loss, 
especially for low frequencies (audiometry is 
usually required to detect this) 

• tinnitus or a sense of pressure/fullness in 
the ear. 


To exclude acoustic neuroma, consider ENT 
referral for any patient with unilateral hearing 
loss and vertigo, especially if the presentation is 
recent in onset or atypical for Meniere’s disease. 


New-onset recurrent spontaneous 
episodes lasting minutes? 

Vertebrobasilar TIAs are normally associated 
with other neurological features, e.g. diplopia, 
dysarthria, facial numbness, but occasionally 
present with episodes of vertigo as the only 
symptom. Patients with a crescendo pattern 
of symptoms may have impending thrombosis 
and require prompt referral for imaging of the 
posterior circulation, eg. MR angiography. 


6 


Associated migraine? 


Enquire about possible migrainous symptoms in 
all patients with episodic vertigo. Those who fulfil 


the diagnostic criteria for migraine (see Table 1 8.2, 
p. 173) and have episodic vertigo with no 
other obvious cause have probable migraine- 
associated vertigo; definitive diagnosis requires 
a temporal association between vertigo and 
migraine headache or aura. 


7 


Consider other causes/ENT referral 


In Meniere’s disease, the patient is often unaware 
of low-frequency hearing loss or tinnitus during 
attacks, and hearing may have returned to 
normal by the time of audiometry. In these 
circumstances, recurrent attacks of spontaneous 
vertigo may be the only presenting feature. 

Suspect ototoxicity in any patient with new- 
onset vertigo or other balance/hearing distur¬ 
bance if gentamicin, furosemide or cisplatin has 
recently been prescribed. Persistent symptoms 
despite drug cessation may indicate irreversible 
vestibulocochlear dysfunction. 

Reassess all patients for red flag features 
and arrange an MRI of the brain if there is any 
suspicion of a central lesion. 

Patients with dizziness present constantly over 
weeks or whose dizziness is not improved by 
remaining still are unlikely to have true vertigo. 
Otherwise, refer to ENT for further evaluation. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













DIZZINESS 


103 


Vertigo: step by-step assessment 



Fig. 10.1 The Dix—Hallpike test. Start with the patient sitting upright on the couch. Explain what you are going to do. 
[A] Rapidly lie the patient supine with the head (supported by your hands) extended over the end of the couch and turned 
to the rght. Maintain this position for at least 30 seconds, asking the patient to report any symptoms whilst observing for 
nystagmus. [B] Repeat with the head turned to the left. The test is positive if the patient develops symptoms of vertigo and 
nystagmus. (From Boon NA, Colledge NR, Walker BR. Davidson’s Principles & Practice of Medicine, 20th edn Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone, 2006.) 


10 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 












DIZZINESS 


Light-headedness/presyncope: overview 


1 


Features of shock? 


Yes 




Assess as per Chapter 30 


No 


2 


3 


4 


5 


Postural symptoms + orthostatic 

Yes 

hypotension? 


| No 


Clinical or ECG featu es that suggest 
structural heart disease? 

Yes 

-► 


No -4- 


Clinical or ECG features that suggest 

Yes 

arrhythmia? 



No 4- 


Typical precipitant or prodrome? 


Yes 


♦ 


Orthostatic presyncope 



Echocardiogram 

Cardiac syncope 




Document 

rhythm 

Intermittent arrhythmia 



Likely reflex presyncope 


No 


Diagnosis uncertain; consider other causes of dizziness 

If recurrent presyncope, consider tilt test, Holter monitor, implantable loop recorder or refer Cardiology 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


































Light-headedness/presyncope: step-by-step assessment 


105 


1 Features of shock? 

Acute light-headedness may signify haemody¬ 
namic instability. Look for shock (Box 30.1, p 
267), including early features, e.g. THR, narrow 
pulse pressure, pallor or postural J-BP. If present, 
assess as described in Chapter 30. 


a history or clinical signs of aortic stenosis/ 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
clinical features of cardiac failure 
relevant ECG abnormalities, e.g. severe left 
ventricular hypertrophy, right heart strain, 
deep anterior T-wave inversion 


A secure diagnosis of orthostatic presyncope 
requires: 

• a clear temporal relationship between light¬ 
headedness and standing up 

• demonstration of a significant postural 
BP drop (>20 mmHg in systolic BP or 
>10 mmHg in diastolic BP within 3 minutes 
of changing from a lying to a standing 
position). 

If orthostatic presyncope is detected, search 
for underlying causes, e.g. antihypertensives, 
dehydration, autonomic neuropathy. 





Clinical or ECG features that 

Postural symptoms + orthostatic 


4 

suggest arrhythmia? 

hypotension? 





of light-headedness are associated with palpita¬ 
tion or occur whilst supine, if there are significant 
ECG abnormalities (see Box 31 .3, p. 273), or if 
the patient has a history of myocardial infarction. 

The key to clinching the diagnosis is to 
document the rhythm during a typical episode 
If episodes are relatively frequent, arrange Holter 
monitoring, e.g. 24-hour tape; if less frequent, a 
patient-activated external recorder or implantable 
loop recorder may be more helpful. 


5 Typical precipitant or prodrome? 


3 


Clinical or ECG features that suggest 
structural heart disease? 


Consider echocardiog aphy to exclude structural 
heart disease in patients with: 

• exertional presyncope 

• a family history of sudden unexplained 
death 


Consider whether episodes of light-headedness 
occurred while the patient was standing and 
had a clear precipitating trigger, e.g. intense 
emotion, venepuncture or prolonged standing 
and/or were accompanied by other ‘prodromal’ 
features such as nausea, sweating and distur¬ 
bance of vision. A tilt test may help to clinch 
the diagnosis. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
















DIZZINESS 


Unsteadiness: overview 



Diagnosis uncertain; consider anxiety or reassessment of presentation 
Refer ENT or Neurology if persistent or disabling disturbance of balance 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

























DIZZINESS 


107 


Unsteadiness: step-by-step assessment 


1 Likely drug culprit? 

Drug causes of unsteadiness are numerous and 
common but close attention should be paid to 
the following agents: 

• alcohol 

• antihypertensives 

• sedatives, e.g. benzodiazepines 

• antipsychotics, e.g. haloperidol 

• antidepressants, e.g. amitriptyline 

• anticonvulsants, e.g. carbamazepine. 

If safe to do so, discontinue potential drug 
culprits and reassess 


2 


Ataxia or cerebellar signs? 


Suspect cerebellar dysfunction if there is 
ataxia (broad-based, unsteady gait; inability to 
heel-toe walk) or other typical clinical features, 
e.g. intention tremor, dysdiadochokinesis, 
past-pointing, dysarthria or nystagmus If any 
of these is present, enquire about current and 


previous alcohol intake and consider an MR I of 
the brain and/or neurology referral. 


3 


Nystagmus, hearing disturbance or 
positive Dix—Hallpike manoeuvre? 


Even if the patient’s account of dizziness is not 
suggestive of vertigo, the presence of nystagmus, 
hearing disturbance or a positive Dix-Hallpike 
manoeuvre suggests vestibular dysfunction. 
Refer to ENT. 


4 


Elderly, frail or multiple comorbidities? 


Multiple factors may contribute to unsteadiness, 
particularly in the elderly, including limb weakness, 
sensory neuropathy, impaired proprioception, 
joint disease, impaired visual acuity and loss of 
confidence. Several factors commonly coexist. 
If the patient has evidence of more than one 
of these, is frail/elderly or exhibits unsteadiness 
during walking, assess as described for mobility 
problems (Ch. 24). 


10 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 












11 


Dysphagia 


Patients with dysphagia require prompt assess¬ 
ment to exclude serious pathology. Unless the 
history clearly points to a functional oropharyngeal 
cause, oesophageal investigation is necessary to 
rule out mechanical obstruction - in particular, 
malignancy. 


Oropharyngeal dysphagia 

Bulbar palsy 

Lower motor neuron palsies of cranial nerves IX- 
XII result in weakness of the tongue and muscles 
of chewing/swallowing. The tongue is flaccid 
with fasciculation, often with a change in voice 
(Table 11.1). Causes include motor neuron 
disease (MND) and brainstem tumour or 
infarction. 

Pseudobulbar palsy 

Bilateral upper motor neuron lesions of cranial 
nerves IX XII produce a small, contracted and 
slowly moving tongue and pharyngeal muscles 
with a brisk jaw jerk (Fig. 11.1). There may be 
associated speech disturbance and emotional 
lability (Table 11.1). Causes include cerebro¬ 
vascular disease, demyelination and MND. 

Myasthenia gravis 

Fatigability of oropharyngeal muscles causes 
increasing swallowing difficulty after the first few 
mouthfuls. Dysphagia may occur before other 
features of myasthenia are readily apparent. 

Pharyngeal pouch 

The pouch is formed by posterior herniation of 
the pharyngeal mucosa between the thyroph- 
aryngeus and cricopharyngeus muscle, and is 
usually found in elderly patients. In addition to 
dysphagia, there is classically regurgitation of 
undigested food, halitosis, the feeling of a lump 
in the neck and gurgling after swallowing liquids. 


Parkinson’s disease and stroke 

These frequently cause swallowing difficulty but 
other features are usually more prominent. 

| Inadequate saliva 

Inadequate saliva, e.g. anticholinergics, connec¬ 
tive tissue disease, such as Sjogren’s syndrome, 
may lead to problems with forming a manageable 
bolus. 

Other causes 

These include myopathies, myotonic dystrophy 
and tumours of the pharynx or larynx. 

Oesophageal dysphagia (structural) 

Both structural disease and dysmotility may 
cause dysphagia Structural causes usually cause 
dysphagia for solids; motility disorders may cause 
dysphagia for solids and liquids. 

Food bolus obstruction 

There is sudden onset of complete dysphagia, 
often with an inability to swallow even saliva. The 
diagnosis is usually obvious from the history but 
it may be the first manifestation of an underlying 
stricture. 

Malignant stricture 

Patients with oesophageal cancer typically 
present with progressive, painless dysphagia 
to solid foods Weight loss may be marked, 
especially if presentation is delayed. Cachexia 
and lymphadenopathy are suggestive but physi¬ 
cal signs are typically absent. 

Benign stricture 

Most commonly, benign stricture is due to 
gastro-oesophageal reflux, especially in the 
elderly. Rarer causes include oesophageal webs 
(seen in iron deficiency, typically posterior to 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

















Differential diagnosis 


109 


Table 11.1 Comparison of signs in bulbar and 
pseudobulbar palsy 


Bulbar 

Pseudobulbar 

Speech 

Nasal tone; 
difficulty forming 
consonants 
(especially 'R'); 
may become 
slurred 

’Donald duck’ 
voice 

Tongue 

Weak, wasted 
with fasciculation 

Small, stiff 

Jaw jerk 

Normal or absent 

Brisk 

Gag reflex 

Absent 

Present 

Emotions 

Normal 

Labile (e.g. 

uncontrollable 

laughing/crying) 



Fig 11.1 The jaw jerk. To elicit the jaw jerk, ask the 
patient to let his/her mouth hang open, place your index 
finger on the patient's chin and strike your finger with a 
tendon hammer. (From Ford MJ, Hennessey I, Japp A. 
Introduction to Clinical Examination, 8th edn Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone, 2005.) 


the cricoid), Schatzki rings (benign idiopathic 
strictures of the lower oesophagus), ingestion 
of caustic substances, eosinophilic oesophagitis 
or, rarely, benign oesophageal tumours and 
radiotherapy. 


|Hiatus hernia 

Hiatus hernia with an associated intrathoracic 
stomach can present with dysphagia and vom¬ 
iting. Urgent treatment is required to prevent 
strangulation of the stomach. 

| Extrinsic compression 

Lung cancer, thyroid goitre, mediastinal nodes, 
an enlarged left atrium or a thoracic aortic 
aneurysm may, rarely, produce dysphagia by 
compressing the oesophagus. 

Oesophageal dysphagia (dysmotility) 

Achalasia 

This is an uncommon disorder characterized by 
loss of peristalsis in the distal oesophagus and 
impaired relaxation of the lower oesophageal 
sphincter. Dysphagia is of slow onset (often 
years), occurs for liquids and solids and may 
initially be intermittent. Dysphagia for liquids 
is the most prominent symptom. Retrosternal 
discomfort and regurgitation are common. 

Chagas disease 

Chagas disease can present with achalasia; 
consider it in patients originating from endemic 
areas in Central and South America and confirm 
with serological testing. 

Scleroderma 

Oesophageal involvement is seen in -90% 
of cases; impaired peristalsis results from 
replacement of muscle with fibrous tissues 
and severe gastro-oesophageal reflux occurs 
due to incompetence of the lower oesophageal 
sphincter. Other features of scleroderma, e.g. 
calcinosis, Raynaud’s disease, telangiectasia, 
may be apparent. 

Diffuse oesophageal spasm 

This may cause transient episodes of dysphagia, 
although episodic chest pain that mimics angina 
is usually the predominant symptom. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 































DYSPHAGIA 


Overview 


Full clinical assessment 


Difficulty in swallowing food or fluids? 


No 


Consider globus/odynophagia 


Yes 

2 Suspect oropharyngeal cause? 

J No 

Upper Gl endoscopy 


Stricture/oesophagitis/motility disorder 


Yes 


Contrast swallow / manometry - 


Yes 


Motility disorder/pharyngeal pouch 


Neurological abnormality? 


Cerebrovascular accident/bulbar palsy/ 
pseudobulbar palsy/Parkinson’s disease 


No 


Fatigability/muscle weakness? 


Yes 


Myasthenia gravis/myopathy/myositis 


No 


Abnormality on ENT investigation? 


Yes 


Oropharyngeal cancer / pharyngeal pouch 


No 


Consider upper Gl endoscopy if not already performed 

CT if any suspicion of head and neck tumour 

Refer to Gl or speech and language therapy if symptoms persist 


1 Difficulty in swallowing foods or fluids? 

Features of true dysphagia include difficulty initiat¬ 
ing swallowing or the sensation of food ‘sticking’ 
after swallowing. Globus is the sensation of a 
lump in the throat; it is unrelated to swallowing 
and often associated with anxiety or strong 
emotion. Odynophagia is pain on swallowing and 
suggests oesophageal inflammation or ulceration. 


2 Suspect oropharyngeal cause? 

Suspect oropharyngeal dysphagia if the patient 
does NOT report food sticking in the lower throat 
or retrosternum and one or more of the following 
features is present: 

• drooling/spillage of food from the mouth 

• immediate sensation of a bolus catching’ 
in the neck 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










































DYSPHAGIA 


111 


Step-by-step assessment 


• difficulty initiating swallow - repeated 
attempts are required to clear the bolus 

• choking/coughing on swallowing. 

If none of these features are present, investigate 
for an oesophageal cause. Arrange a UGIE to 
look for a structural cause, especially oesopha¬ 
geal cancer. UGIE may also reveal features of 
certain motility disorders, e.g. achalasia, but can 
be normal, especially in scleroderma or diffuse 
oesophageal spasm. 

If no cause is identified on UGIE, consult a Gl 
specialist, as further investigation for a motility 
disorder, e.g. contrast swallow or oesophageal 
manometry, may be required. If all Gl investiga¬ 
tions are reassuring, re-evaluate for a possible 
oropharyngeal cause. 


3 


Neurological abnormality? 


f the history suggests an oropharyngeal aetiol 
ogy for dysphagia, neurological evaluaton 
is essential. Although swallowing difficulty is 
common in stroke, Parkinson’s disease and 
multiple sclerosis, it is very rarely the primary 
presenting problem. However, dysphagia may 
be the principal complaint in bulbar palsy and 
pseudobulbar palsy so look carefully for the 
relevant clinical features (Table 11.1); if they are 
present, look for other features of MND and 
perform neuroimaging to exclude vascular or 
structural brainstem disease. 


4 


Fatigability/muscle weakness? 


Myasthenia gravis is rare and easily missed. The 
dysphagia typically presents with increasing dif¬ 
ficulty in swallowing after the first few mouthfuls 
and difficulty in chewing. Ask specifically about/ 
examine for: 


• fatigable weakness of muscles: initial 
strength is normal but there is a rapid 
decline with activity 

• weak voice with prolonged speaking 

• diplopia 

• ptosis 


• muscle fatigability (ask the patient to 
count to 50 or hold the arms above the 
head). Refer to a Neurologist if you suspect 
the diagnosis. 


5 


Abnormality on ENT investigation? 


Exclude oropharyngeal cancer if the patient has 
an oropharyngeal pattern of dysphagia (see step 
2) without evidence of underlying neurological/ 
neuromuscular disorder - especially if risk 
factors (smoking, alcohol, human papillomavirus 
infection) or other suggestive clinical features, e.g. 
palpable neck lump, halitosis, cough, hoarseness, 
sore throat, ear pain (referred pain), weight loss. 
Refer to an ENT specialist for investigation, e.g 
nasendoscopy and CT/MRI scanning. 

Investigate for a pharyngeal pouch e.g. 
contrast swallow or nasoendoscopy, if there is 
associated regurgitation or a lump in the neck 
that appears after eating (occasionally may 
be compressed by hand, expunging the food 
contents of the pouch), +/- halitosis (from food 
lodged in the pouch), weight loss, aspiration or 
chronic cough. 


11 


Consider further investigation/referral to 
Gl or speech and language therapy 


If not already done, arrange urgent UGIE 
unless there is clear evidence of neurological 
or neuromuscular dysfunction. Request a CT if 
you suspect cancer of the head and neck, e.g. 
local mass or lymphadenopathy. Once significant 
pathology of the oropharynx and oesophagus is 
actively excluded, refer patients with suspected 
oropharyngeal dysphagia of uncertain cause to 
the speech and language therapy team for a 
detailed swallow evaluation with formal speech 
and ± videofluoroscopy. This will confirm the 
presence of oropharyngeal dysfunction and help 
to clarify the mechanism. If you still suspect 
oesophageal dysphagia, refer to a Gl specialist 
for further assessment. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 












Dyspnoea 


The sensation of breathlessness occurs when 
there is a mismatch between instructions for 
ventilation sent by the brainstem, and sensory 
feedback from the thorax. When evaluating a 
patient with breathlessness, remember that 
severity is highly subjective. Some individuals 
may not experience dyspnoea despite severe 
impairment of gas exchange. 


Acute dyspnoea 


Acute dyspnoea is defined here as new-onset 
or abruptly worsening breathlessness within the 
preceding 2 weeks. When accompanied by 
severe hypoxaemia, hypercapnia, exhaustion or 
-iGCS, it may herald life threatening pathology. 
The diagnosis can usually be made by combin¬ 
ing clinical evaluation and monitoring with key 
investigations including CXR, ECG and ABG. In 
the initial phase of assessment, diagnosis and 
treatment should be concurrent, and the cycle of 
intervention and reassessment should continue 
until the patient is stable. Important causes of 
acute dyspnoea are listed below. 

Upper airway obstruction 

• Inhaled foreign body. 

• Anaphylaxis. 

• Epiglottitis. 

• Extrinsic compression, e.g. rapidly 
expanding haematoma. 

Lower airway disease 

• Acute bronchitis. 

• Asthma. 

• Acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). 

• Acute exacerbation of bronchiectasis. 

• Anaphylaxis. 


Parenchymal lung disease 

• Pneumonia 

• Lobar collapse. 

• Acute respiratory distress syndrome 
(ARDS). 

Other respiratory causes 

• Pneumothorax. 

• Pleural effusion. 

• Pulmonary embolism (PE). 

• Acute chest wall injury. 

Cardiovascular causes 

• Acute cardiogenic pulmonary oedema. 

• Acute coronary syndrome. 

• Cardiac tamponade. 

• Arrhythmia. 

• Acute valvular heart disease. 


Other causes 

• Metabolic acidosis. 

• Psychogenic breathlessness (acute 
hyperventilation). 


Chronic dyspnoea 


Chronic dyspnoea is defined here as breathless¬ 
ness of >2 weeks’ duration. Use the Medical 
Research Council (MRC) dyspnoea scale (Box 
12.1) to assess the severity of breathlessness. 

Important causes of chronic dyspnoea are 
listed below. 

For many causes, the diagnosis can be made 
by combining clinical evaluation with PFTs, ECG, 
CXR, FBC and pulse oximetry. However, early 
presentations of common problems, such as 
COPD and congestive cardiac failure may have 
no clinical signs and a normal CXR In 1 in 3 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



















DYSPNOEA 


Differential diagnosis 


Box 12.1 MRC dyspnoea scale 


Grade 1 Not troubled by breathlessness except on 
strenuous exercise 

Grade 2 Short of breath when hurrying or walking up 
a slight hill 

Grade 3 Walks slower than contemporaries on level 
ground because of breathlessness, or has to stop for 
breath when walking at own pace 
Grade 4 Stops for breath after walking about 100 m or 
after a few minutes on level ground 
Grade 5 Too breathless to leave the house, or 
breathless when dressing or undressing 


Source: Adapted from Fletcher CM, Elmes PC, Fairbairn MB 
etal. 1959. The significance of respiratory symptoms and the 
diagnosis of chronic bronchitis in a working population. Br Med 
J. 2:257-266. 


patients, there is more than one underlying 
diagnosis to explain dyspnoea, so assess dysp- 
noeic patients thoroughly, even after a possible 
explanation has been found, particularly if the 
severity of pathology found is not commensurate 
with the severity of symptoms. 

Respiratory causes 

• Asthma. 

• COPD 

• Pleural effusion. 

• Lung cancer: bronchial carcinoma, 
mesothelioma, lymphangitis 
carcinomatosis. 


• Interstitial lung disease (ILD), e.g. 
sarcoidosis, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, 
extrinsic allergic alveolitis. 

• Chronic pulmonary thromboembolism 

• Bronchiectasis. 

• Cystic fibrosis. 

• Pulmonary hypertension (primary or 
secondary). 

• Pulmonary vasculitis. 

• Tuberculosis (TB). 

• Laryngeal/tracheal stenosis, e.g. extrinsic 
compression, malignancy. 


Cardiovascular causes 


• Chronic heart failure. 

• Coronary artery disease (‘angina 
equivalent'). 

• Valvular heart disease. 

• Paroxysmal arrhythmia. 

• Constrictive pericarditis. 

• Pericardial effusion. 

• Cyanotic congenital heart disease. 


12 


Other causes 

• Severe anaemia. 

• Obesity. 

• Chest wall disease, e.g. kyphoscoliosis. 

• Physical deconditioning. 

• Diaphragmatic paralysis. 

• Psychogenic hyperventilation. 

• Neuromuscular disorder, e.g. myasthenia 
gravis, muscular dystrophies. 

• Cirrhosis (hepatopulmonary syndrome). 

• Tense ascites. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
















DYSPNOEA 


Acute dyspnoea: overview 


ABODE + ECG, CXR ± ABG 



► 


Final diagnosis 



6 Generalised wheeze with iPEFR? 


Yes 


Acute asthma 


- - - - ► See Further assessment 
of acute asthma (p. 122) 


No 


7 Diagnostic CXR abnormality? 


Yes 


Pneumothorax/pleural effusion/ 
lobar collapse/other 


No 


8 Ischaemic ECG changes (see Box 6.1)? 


Yes 


Likely acute coronary syndrome 


No 


ABG shows primary metabolic acidosis 

Yes 

Consider diabetic ketoacidosis/salicylate 

with normal Pa0 2 ? 


poisoning/uraemia/shock 


No 


Clinical suspicion of pulmonary 

Yes , CTPA/ t 

Pulmonary embolism 

embolism or unexplained hypoxaemia? 

perfusion scan 

(or alternative diagnosis) 


No 4- 


Diagnosis uncertain: seek respiratory input if hypoxia, hypercapnia, haemoptysis or abnormal CXR 
Consider primary hyperventilation if ABG shows respiratory alkalosis with normal Pa0 2 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 







































































DYSPNOEA 


Acute dyspnoea: step-by-step assessment 


1 Cause requiring immediate correction? 

As part of the ABODE assessment process 
(p. 8), dentify and provide immediate corrective 
treatment for: 

• airway obstruction 

• tension pneumothorax 

• anaphylaxis 

• arrhythmia with cardiac compromise. 

Seek specialist input if necessary and repeat 
the assessment following intervention. 


Assess effort and adequacy of 
oxygenation and ventilation 

This is undamental to the assessment of 
acute respiratory compromise and should be 
reassessed frequently to monitor progress and 
evaluate the effects of interventions. 

Assess the effort of breathing by repeated 
clinical observation of rate, depth and pattern 
of respiration; look for use of accessory muscles 
and features of exhaustion. Monitor the Sp0 2 
by pulse oximetry in all patients and perform 
ABG analysis if any of the following features is 
present: 

• a need for airway or ventilatory support 

• Sp0 2 <92% (or unreliable), central cyanosis 
or high 0 2 requirements 

• features of hypercapnia: drowsiness, 
confusion, asterixis 

• severe, prolonged or worsening respiratory 
distress 

• background of COPD and/or chronic type 2 
respiratory failure 

• smoke inhalation (carboxyhaemoglobin) 

• suspected metabolic acidosis or primary 
hyperventilation. 

Use the Sp0 2 ± Pa0 2 to assess adequacy 
of oxygenation. 

Correct hypoxia by administration of supple¬ 
mental 0 2 . Titrate the inspired 0 2 concentration 
(Fi0 2 ) to the minimum required to achieve a target 
Sp0 2 : 

• 94-98% for previously well patients. 

• normal baseline Sp0 2 for patients with 
chronic hypoxia. 

Monitor Fi0 2 requirements carefully to maintain 
the target Sp0 2 . 

Use the PaC0 2 to assess adequacy of ventila¬ 
tion (see Clinical tool, p. 116). 


Distinguish acute and acute-on-chronic 
ventilatory failure from chronic compensated 
hypercapnia. 

Look for reversible factors contributing to 
ventilatory impairment, e.g. bronchospasm, seda¬ 
tion, respiratory depressants. Be vigilant for loss 
of hypoxic drive in patients with chronic type 2 
respiratory failure receiving supplemental 0 2 but 
suspect an alternative cause, e.g. exhaustion, 
airways obstruction, if the patient exhibits marked 
breathlessness or increased effort of breathing. 

Seek input from the critical care team and 
consider the need for respiratory support, e.g. 
non-invasive ventilation or tracheal intubation 
and mechanical ventilation if any of the following 
features is present: 

• impending exhaustion 

• acute/acute-on-chronic ventilatory 
failure not resolving with the measures 
described above 

• progressively rising PaC0 2 

• Sp0 2 <90% or Pa0 2 <8 kPa despite 
maximal respiratory assistance 

• progressively rising Fi0 2 requirements to 
maintain target Sp0 2 . 


3 


Underlying COPD? 


See ‘Further assessment of acute dyspnoea 
in COPD’ if the patient has known or suspected 
COPD. 

In the absence of a pre-existing diagnosis, 
suspect COPD in any patient with a smoking 
history and either: 

• clinical (Fig. 12.1) or CXR features of 
hyperinflation, or 

• chronic exertional dyspnoea with wheeze 
and/or a chronic productive cough. 


4 


Evidence of respiratory tract 
infection (RTI)? 


Having considered the above conditions, go to 
‘Further assessment of respiratory tract infection’ 
if any of the following features is present: 

• new cough with purulent sputum or 
significant increase in purulent sputum 

• temperature >38°C or <35°C 

• acute illness with sweating, shivers and 
myalgia 

• clinical/CXR signs of consolidation 
(Figs 12.2 and 12.3) with TWBC/CRP. 


12 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













DYSPNOEA 


Acute dyspnoea: step-by-step assessment 


Clinical tool 

Interpretation of arterial blood gases 


Assessment of ventilation 

PaC0 2 is directly determined by alveolar ventilation - the 
volume of air transported between the alveoli and the 
outside world in any given time. Therefore, tPaC0 2 
(hypercapnia) implies ventilatory failure - type 2 respiratory 
failure. 


is clearly impaired, suggesting the presence of important 
lung disease. However, this Pa0 2 would usually result in 
an Sa0 2 (arterial oxygen saturation) >90%, a level which 
will allow adequate delivery of 0 2 to tissues (provided that 
haemoglobin and cardiac output are normal) 

Assessment of acid-base status 


A slow, gradual rise in PaC0 2 (chronic type 2 respiratory 
failure) is usually accompanied by an increase in 
HC0 3 ~ that serves to maintain overall acid-base balance 
(H + within normal range). However, this metabolic 
compensation occurs over days/weeks so any acute rise in 
PaC0 2 (acute or acute-on-chronic type 2 respiratory failure) 
will lead to an increase in H + (Table 12.1). 

In type 2 respirato y failure, the rate of rise in PaC0 2 and 
the associated increase in H + provide a better guide to 
severity than the absolute value of PaC0 2 . 

A iPaC0 2 implies hyperventilation. If Pa0 2 is also lowered 
(or just within normal limits), the hyperventilation is 
probably an appropriate response to hypoxia. Alternatively, 
if HC0 3 " is decreased, it may reflect respiratory 
compensation for a primary metabolic acidosis, e.g. 
diabetic ketoacidosis. A J.PaC0 2 with normal Pa0 2 and 
HC0 3 " (on room air) suggests primary (psychogenic) 
hyperventilation but this is a diagnosis of exclusion (see 
below). 

Assessment of oxygenation 

A J,Pa0 2 implies impairment of oxygenation. A 
corresponding normal PaC0 2 indicates that this is due to 
ventilation/perfusion mismatch-type 1 respiratoryfailure. 
In contrast tPaC0 2 indicates that it is due, at least in part, 
to failure of ventilation - type 2 respiratory failure. 

The administration of supplemental 0 2 makes ABG analysis 
more complex as it can be difficult to judge whether the 
Pa0 2 is appropriate for the Fi0 2 and, hence, whether 
oxygenation is impaired. A useful rule of thumb is that the 
difference between Fi0 2 (%) and Pa0 2 (in kPa) should be 
<10. A patient breathing room air (Fi0 2 of 21 %) should 
have a Pa0 2 of at least 11 kPa. If subtle impairment is 
suspected, repeat the ABG on room air. 

It is important to note the distinction between impaired 
oxygenation (iPaCy and inadequate oxygenation 
(insufficient Pa0 2 to support normal aerobic metabolism). 
Consider a patient with a Pa0 2 of 8.5 kPa: oxygenation 


An acidosis is any process that acts to lower blood pH 
(TH 4 ); an alkalosis is one that acts to raise blood pH (iR 1 ). 
An tPaC0 2 indicates a respiratory acidosis; a lPaC0 2 
indicates a respiratory alkalosis. 

A .iHCO-f indicates a metabolic acidosis; an THC0 3 - 
indicates a metabolic alkalosis. 

A respiratory or metabolic acid-base disturbance usually 
triggers an adjustment by the other system to limit 
the change in blood pH (compensation). Respiratory 
compensation happens over minutes; metabolic 
compensation takes days to weeks. 

Having identified the presence of any metabolic or 
respiratory disturbances, look next at H + (or pH) to assess 
the overall impact on acid-base status If the metabolic 
and respiratory processes oppose each other, the H + 
helps to differentiate the primary disturbance from the 
compensatory response: an TH + (or upper limit of normal) 
suggests that the acidosis is the primary disturbance and 
vice versa. 

Primary respiratory acidosis (ventilatory failure) and 
alkalosis (hyperventilation) are dealt with above. 

Causes of metabolic acidosis and alkalosis are shown in 
Box 12 2. If there is a primary metabolic acidosis, calculate 
the anion gap: 

Anion gap = (Na + + K + )-(Ch + HC0 3 ) 
[Normal = 10-18 mmol/L] 


Table 12.1 Arterial blood gases in different 
patterns of type 2 respiratory failure 


PaC0 2 

HC0 3 - 

pH 

Acute 

T 

—> 

1 

Chronic 

T 

T 

—> 

Acute-on-chronic 

T 

T 

i 


5 


Clinical/CXR features of heart failure? 


Acute decompensated heart failure is the likely 
cause of breathlessness if any of the following 
are present: 

• CXR evidence of pulmonary oedema or 
congestion (Fig. 12.4) 


• a recent history of orthopnoea, nocturnal 
dyspnoea or progressively worsening 
exertional dyspnoea 

• signs of fluid overload: peripheral 
oedema, TJVP 

Always suspect the diagnosis in patients 
with a background of chronic heart failure or 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


















DYSPNOEA 


Acute dyspnoea: step by-step assessment 



Pursed lips 


Increased rate and 
depth of breathing 


Intercostal indrawing 


Sitting forward and gripping bed 
(increases action of accessory 
muscles) 

Signs of hyperinflation 

tAntero-posterior diameter 
Intercostal indrawing 
Decreased cricosternal distance 
Poor chest expansion (<5 cm) 


Fig. 12.1 Clinical features of COPD. 


12 


Box 12.2 Causes of metabolic acidosis 
and alkalosis 


Metabolic acidosis (low HC0 3 ) 

With raised anion gap 

• Lactic acidosis, e.g. hypoxaemia, shock, sepsis, 
infarction 

• Ketoacidosis (diabetes, starvation, alcohol excess) 

• Renal failure 

• Poisoning (aspirin, methanol, ethylene glycol) 

With normal anion gap 

• Renal tubular acidosis 

• Diarrhoea 

• Ammonium chloride ingestion 

• Adrenal insufficiency 

Metabolic alkalosis (high HC0 3 - ) 

• Vomiting 

• Potassium depletion, e.g. diuretics 

• Cushing's syndrome 

• Conn's syndrome (primary hyperaldosteronism) 


other predisposing cardiac condition, e.g. 
previous Ml, LV systolic dysfunction or valvular 
disease but assess carefully for alternative 
causes of acute decompensation (especially if 
the above features are absent) and remember 



Fig. 12.2 Pneumonia of the right middle lobe. 


that acute heart failure can also present de 
novo. 

Difficulty may arise when the CXR is not 
diagnostic, e.g. in early or mild cases, and when 
auscultatory findings resemble those heard in 
other disorders, e.g. pulmonary fibrosis, bilat¬ 
eral pneumonia. A therapeutic trial may assist 
diagnosis: rapid improvement of symptoms 
with vasodilators/diuretics is strongly suggestive 
of heart failure as the aetiology of dyspnoea. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

















DYSPNOEA 


Acute dyspnoea: step-by-step assessment 



Fig. 12.3 Right upper lobe pneumonia containing air 
bronchograms. 



Fig. 12.4 Left ventricular failure. Note the hazy perihilar 
shadowing (‘bat’s wings’), the prominent, dilated upper 
lobe veins and the basal Kerley B lines, all characteristic of 
pulmonary oedema. There is also cardiomegaly. 


Consider non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema 
in acutely dyspnoeic patients with bilateral pul¬ 
monary infiltrates but no other evidence of heart 
failure - especially in the setting of severe acute 
pathology such as trauma, burns, pancreatitis 
or sepsis. 

Echocardiography, to assess ventricular and 
valvular function, is a key diagnostic test and 
is particularly useful in patients without a pre¬ 
existing diagnosis of heart failure or in those with 
possible non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema. 

If available, brain-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) 
testing can help to rule out acute heart failure. 
Low plasma BNP (<100 pg/mL) or N-terminal-pro 
BNP (<300 pg/mL) make the diagnosis unlikely. 



However, BNP is also raised in a wde variety 
of other cardiac and non-cardiac conditions so 
elevated levels do not automatically confirm a 
diagnosis of acute heart failure. 


6 


Generalized wheeze with iPEFR? 


See 'Further assessment of acute asthma 
exacerbation’ in patients with known asthma 
and either: 


• generalized wheeze, or 

• J-PEFR. 


Consider other causes of acute dyspnoea, 
e.g. pneumothorax or PE, if neither of these 
features is present. 

Suspect a first presentation of asthma (and 
proceed to ‘Further assessment of acute asthma 
exacerbation’) if there is widespread wheeze with 
no evidence of COPD, anaphylaxis or pulmonary 
oedema (see above). Assess with pulmonary 
function tests (PFTs) ± PEFR diary following 
resolution of the acute episode. 


Diagnostic CXR abnormality? 


CXR may be more sensitive than clinical examina¬ 
tion for detecting some lung abnormalities, e.g 
pneumothorax (Fig. 12.5), pleural effusion (Fig. 
1 2.6) or lobar collapse (see Figs 17.3 and 1 7.4, 
p. 163). 

See below (p. 129) for ‘Further assessment 
of pleural effusion'. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 









DYSPNOEA 


Acute dyspnoea: step by-step assessment 



Fig. 12.6 Left pleural effusion. 


If the patient has lobar collapse, consider 
fur her investigation, e.g. bronchoscopy to 
exclude a proximal obstructing lesion. 

If CXR appearances are non-specific or uncer¬ 
tain, continue through the diagnostic process 
and attempt to correlate with clinical findings. 
Consider further imaging, e.g. CT thorax, or 
specialist respiratory input if no firm diagnosis 
emerges. 


Ischaemic ECG changes 
(see Box 6.1, p. 51)? 

Dyspnoea may be the predominant manifestation 
of myocardial ischaemia/infarction. If there is ECG 
evidence of ischaemia (Box 6.1) and no obvious 
alternative cause for breathlessness, assess as 
described in Chapter 6. 


9 


ABG shows primary metabolic acidosis 
with normal Pa0 2 ? 


Identify the presence of metabolic acidosis by 
ABG analysis (see Clinical tool, p. 116). If present, 
look for an underlying cause (see Box 12.2) 

• examine for evidence of shock or 
mesenteric infarction 

• test urine for glucose and ketones 

• check U & E 

• measure plasma glucose, lactate, salicylate 
levels 

• calculate the anion gap. 

Do not attribute dyspnoea solely to metabolic 
acidosis if there is evidence of hypoxaemia. 


Table 12.2 Clinical and chest X-ray findings in 
patients with suspected PE in the emergency 
department (with and without confirmed PE on 

further investigation) 



Confirmed PE 

No PE identified 

Feature 

(n = 1,880) 

(n = 528) 

Clinical findings 

Dyspnoea at 

50% 

51% 

rest 

Pleuritic chest 
pain 

39% 

28% 

Cough 

23% 

23% 

Haemoptysis 

8% 

5% 

Syncope 

6% 

6% 

Signs of DVT 
(unilateral limb 
swelling) 

24% 

18% 

CXR findings 

Normal 

40% 

41% 

Atelectasis 

17% 

15% 

Infiltrate 

14% 

14% 

Pleural effusion 

16% 

14% 

Adapted from Pollack CV et at 2011. Clinical characteristics, 
management, and outcomes of patients diagnosed with acute 
pulmonary embolism in the emergency department: initial report of 
EMPEROR (Multicenter Emergency Medicine Pulmonary Embolism 
in the Real World Registry) JAm Coll Cardiol. 57(6):700-706. 


10 


Clinical suspicion of PE? 


PE is under-diagnosed. Clinical and CXR find¬ 
ings, in isolation, lack diagnostic sensitivity and 
specificity (Table 12.2). Use a clinical decision 
tool such as that shown in Fig. 12.7 and Table 
12.3 to evaluate for PE in patients with acute 
dyspnoea and any of the following: 

• relevant risk factors, e.g. active malignancy, 
recent surgery or prolonged immobility 

• haemoptysis, pleuritic chest pain or 
evidence of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) 

• unexplained hypoxaemia 

• ECG features of right heart strain (see p. 58) 

• no clear alternative diagnosis 

D-dimer is less useful in hospitalized patients 
so in this setting consider further investigation 
if the Wells score is >2. Have a low threshold 
for performing ABG as subtle oxygenation 
abnormalities may not be detected by Sp0 2 . 
Where imaging is performed to exclude PE, CT 
pulmonary angiography offers greater sensitiv¬ 
ity than a ventilation/perfusion scan and may 
demonstrate an alternative diagnosis. 


12 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 




















DYSPNOEA 


Acute dyspnoea: step-by-step assessment 


Assess clinical 
probability, using 
Wells score (Table 12.3) 

/ \ 

PE PE 


unlikely 


likely 

\ 


D-dimer* 


■+ve.. 


CTPA 


Fig. 12.7 Algorithm for the assessment of suspected 
pulmonary embolism using the Wells score. 'Highly 
sensitive assay. 


- 1 

-ve 

-ve' 

- 1 

+ve 

PE 

excluded 


Diagnosis 

PE 


Table 12.3 Wells score (pulmonary embolism) 

Clinical variable 

Po nts 

Clinical signs and symptoms of DVT 1 

3 

No alternative diagnosis is more likely 
than PE 

3 

Heart rate >100 bpm 

1.5 

Immobilisation or surgery in the 
previous 4 weeks 

1.5 

Previous DVT/PE 

1.5 

Haemoptysis 

1 

Active malignancy (treatment within 
last 6 months or palliative) 

1 

Score >4: PE likely; <4: PE unlikely 

'Minimum of leg swelling and pain elicited upon palpation of 
the deep veins. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
























DYSPNOEA 


Further assessment of acute dyspnoea in 
patients with COPD 

Step 1 Clarify cause for acute deterioration 

• Ensure that there is no new CXR 
abnormality: look carefully for evidence 
of collapse, consolidation, pneumothorax 
or pleural effusion. If there are features of 
consolidation, treat as pneumonia rather 
than ‘infective exacerbation of COPD’. 

• Ask about cough and sputum: treat as an 
infective exacerbation of COPD if there is 
an increase in sputum volume or purulence 
with no evidence of consolidation. 

• If wheeze is predominant and there 
are no features of infection, the likely 
diagnosis is non-infective exacerbation 
of COPD. Look for precipitants, e.g. 
beta-blocker, non-compliance with inhalers 
environmental trigger. 

• Evaluate for PE (see Fig. 1 2.7) if there is 
a sudden increase in breathlessness or 
hypoxia without wheeze, change in sputum 
or new CXR abnormality. 

Step 2 Establish pre-exacerbation status and details 
of previous exacerbations 

This provides a comprehensive picture of 
underlying disease severity, helping to guide 
the goals and limits of therapy. 

• Baseline performance: quantify normal 
exercise tolerance, ask about activities that 
provoke dyspnoea and ascertain ability to 
perform activities of daily living (ADLs). 

• Baseline lung function: refer to previous ABG/ 
Sp0 2 measurements and PFTs to provide an 


Acute dyspnoea: further assessment 

objective estimate of disease severity 
and look for evidence of chronic hypercapnia 
(see above). 

• Trajectory of disease: consider changes 
in the above severity measures over time, 
the frequency of admissions and previous 
requirement for respiratory support, e.g. 
non-invasive and invasive ventilation. 

• Previous sputum cultures: antibiotic prescribing should 
be guided by local protocols but knowledge of previous 
pathogens may permit more effective tailored therapy; 
discuss with the microbiology team if unusual or resistant 
organisms have been grown on previous cultures. 

Step 3 Compare current status to baseline and 

monitor response to treatment 

• Oxygenation and ventilation: compare 
current ABG values and Sp0 2 to previous 
records. Give supplemental 0 2 to return 
Sp0 2 /Pa0 2 to baseline. If the patient has 
chronic type 2 respiratory failure, monitor 
for loss of ventilatory drive and repeat an 
ABG after any increase in Fi0 2 . 

• Airways obstruction: assess PEFR 
and the presence/extent of wheeze; 
monitor changes to gauge response to 
bronchodilator therapy. 

• Functional reserve: assess overall work of 
breathing (rate, depth, use of accessory 
muscles). Very high respiratory work cannot 
be maintained for long; refer to critical care 
if there is impending exhaustion. 

• Following recovery, record pre-discharge 
PEFR, Sp0 2 and ABG on air. 


12 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 






DYSPNOEA 


Acute dyspnoea: further assessment 


Further assessment of acute asthma 
exacerbation 

Step 1 Assess severity and need for 
hospital admission 

Assess severity in any patient with suspected 
acute asthma according to Table 12.4; perform 
an ABG if there are life-threatening features 
or Sp0 2 <92%. Admit patients to hospital if 
they have: 

• any life-threatening features 

• features of a severe attack persisting after 
initial treatment 

• PEFR <75% or significant ongoing 
symptoms after 1 hour of treatment 

• other features causing concern, e.g. 
previous near-fatal asthma, poor 
compliance. 

If there are ongoing features of a severe attack, 
monitor in a critical care environment with 
repeated assessment of Sp0 2 , PEFR, RR, HR 
and work of breathing ± ABG. Refer urgently 
to the intensive care unit if PaC0 2 is >6 kPa or 
rising, or there is worsening hypoxia, exhaustion 
or iGCS. 


Step 2 Look for treatable precipitants 

Seek evidence of infection, e.g. pyrexia 
pu ulent sputum, TWBC, physical/CXR signs 
of consolidation (see Figs 12.2 and 12.3) and 
flitting upper lobe infiltrates, suggesting allergic 
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. Culture sputum 
if this is purulent and blood if temperature is 
>38° C. Carefully review the CXR to exclude 
pneumothorax (see Fig. 12.5). 

Step 3 Assess baseline control 

Establish: 

• frequency and severity of exacerbations 

• baseline symptoms between exacerbations 

• best PEFR 

• current inhaler regimen, technique and 
compliance 

frequency of PRN inhaler use 

• frequency of oral steroids (need for bone 
protection?) 

• current smoking status. 

Look for avoidable precipitants, e g. pollen, pets, 
cold air, exercise, smoking, occupational triggers, 
beta-blockers, NSAIDs. 


Table 12.4 Clinical features of severe asthma 

Severity 

PEFR 

or Other features 

Moderate 

50-75% best or predicted 

Increased symptoms 

Severe 

33-50% best or predicted 

Any of: 

RR >25 

HR >110 

Inability to complete sentences in one breath 

Life-threatening 

<33% best or predicted 

Any of: 

Pa0 2 <8 kPa 

‘Normal’ PaC0 2 (>4.6-6.0 kPa) 

Sp0 2 <92% 

Silent chest 

Cyanosis 

Exhaustion/altered conscious level 

Poor respiratory effort 

Arrhythmia 

Hypotension 

Near-fatal 


PaC0 2 >6 kPa 

Modified from British Thoracic Society, Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network 2014. British guideline on the management of asthma. 
Thorax. 69(Suppl 1):1-192. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 














DYSPNOEA 


Further assessment of respiratory 
tract infection 

Step 1 Classify the type of RTI 

In patients with features of RTI, distinguish 
pneumonia from non-pneumonic infection by 
the presence of focal chest signs, e.g. crackles, 
bronchial breathing and/or new CXR shadowing 
(see Figs 12.2 and 12.3). Classify as community- 
acquired pneumonia (CAP) if infection has been 
acquired out of hospital, and hospital-acquired 
pneumonia (HAP) if the onset of illness occurred 
>2 days after hospital admission or within 90 days 
of discharge from hospital after an admission 
of 2 or more days. In previously well patients 
without focal chest signs or CXR abnormality, the 
likely diagnosis is non-pneumonic RTI, e.g. acute 
bronchitis. In patients with known bronchiectasis, 
consider an infective exacerbation if the sputum 
becomes more purulent or offensive; assessment 
of patients with underlying COPD is described 
above. 

Step 2 Assess severity 

The CURB-65 score (Table 12.5) can help to 
risk-stratify patients with CAP Consider referral to 
critical care for monitoring/intervention in patients 
with a CURB-65 score >2. Patients with a low 
CURB-65 may still require admission to hospital 
if they require supplementary oxygen. 

Step 3 Look for predisposing factors 

Assess for factors associated with immunocom¬ 
promise, e.g. chronic disease (AIDS, diabetes 
cirrhosis, malnutrition), acute disease (any critical 
illness), drugs (steroids, cancer chemotherapy) 
or previous splenectomy. Suspect aspiration in 
patients with a history of swallowing difficulty, 
stroke, alcoholism or recent unconsciousness. 
Pneumonia may occur distal to a bronchial 
carcinoma - repeat the CXR to ensure resolution 
of changes in patients with risk factors and con¬ 
sider further investiga ion, e.g. bronchoscopy, if 
there are persistent symptoms/CXR features or 
recurrent pneumonia at the same site. Preceding 
viral infection, especially influenza, may predis¬ 
pose to severe secondary bacterial infection. 
Consider endocarditis in patients with multiple 


Acute dyspnoea: further assessment 


Table 12.5 CURB-65 score 

Feature 

Score 

Confusion 

Abbreviated Mental Test <8/10 

Urea 

>7 mmol/L 

RR 

>30/min 

BP 

Systolic <90 or diastolic <60 mmHg 

Age 

>65 years 

Total score 

30-day mortality risk 

0 

0.6% 

1 

3.2% 

2 

13.0% 

3 

17.0% 

4 

41.5% 

5 

57.0% 

LmW, etal. 2003. Defining community acquired pneumonia 

severity on presentation to hospital: an international derivation 

and validation study. Thorax. 58(5):377-382. 


discrete or flitting shadows on CXR, especially 
IV drug users. 

Step 4 Gather information to inform 
antimicrobial choice 

In any patient requiring hospitalisation for RTI, 
culture blood and sputum, perform serological 
assessment for atypical pathogens and (during 
influenza outbreaks) take a viral throat swab. 
In patients with severe pneumonia (CURB-65 
>2), send urine ( Legionella ) and blood/sputum 
(Pneumococcus) for rapid antigen detection by 
PCR. Aspirate pleural fluid for microscopy and 
culture if there is an associated parapneumonic 
effusion. Send multiple sputum samples (induced 
with nebulized hypertonic saline if necessary) for 
Ziehl-Neelsen staining and TB culture if there is 
a suspicion of TB: 

• significant immunocompromise or debility 

• previous residence in an endemic TB area 

• recent close contact with a smear-positive 
TB patient 

• CXR evidence of previous TB 

• a background of persistent productive 
cough with weight loss, night sweats or 
other constitutional symptoms. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


12 


















DYSPNOEA 


Chronic dyspnoea: overview 


Full clinical assessment, Sp0 2 , FBC, ECG, CXR 


1 Dyspnoea related to exertion? 

| Yes 

2 Pleural effusion or iHb? 


No 

Consider asthma, hyperventilation, 


paroxysmal arrhythmia 


Yes 


-► Investigate and treat then reassess 


No 


3 Any alarm features (Box 12.4)? 


Yes 


Exclude lung cancer/other serious pathology 


No 


4 Significant CT abnormality? 


Yes | Interstitial lung disease, cancer, bronchiectasis, 
emphysema, other 


No 


5 Abnormal PFTs? 

1 Yes v 

▼ Yes 

Obstructive defect? -——► Likely COPD or chronic asthma 


No 


1 


Restrictive defect? 

6 Significant echo abnormality? 

No ^ Yes 

Left ventricular impairment? 
J No 

Other diagnostic abnormality? 


Y es . Consider interstitial lung disease, chest wall 
deformity, obesity, neuromuscular 


Yes 


-► Chronic heart failure 


Yes Valvular disease, cardiomyopathy, pulmonary 
* hypertension, pericardial constriction/effusion 


Unexplained hypoxia or Trisk of 

Yes 

Pulmonary embolism/ 

venous thromboembolism? 


other lung pathology 


T 


No 


„ Clinical suspicion of coronary 
artery disease 


J 


Yes Investigate 

-► (Box 6.8, p. 64) —► Likely angina 


No 


Consider obesity, physical deconditioning, psychogenic dyspnoea, neuromuscular disorder 
PFTs, echo ± CPET/respiratory input if limiting, progressive or unexplained symptoms 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





































































DYSPNOEA 


Chronic dyspnoea: step-by-step assessment 


1 Dyspnoea related to exertion? 

Chronic dyspnoea arising from organic disease 
is almost always provoked or exacerbated by 
exertion, so episodic dyspnoea unrelated to 
exertion has a limited range of diagnoses. 
Suspect asthma if there is: 

• associated cough or wheeze 

• a reproducible precipitant for episodes, e.g. 
cold air, pollen, house dust, pets 

• diurnal variation in symptoms with 
prominent nocturnal or early morning 
symptoms (especially if sleep is disturbed), 
or 

• a history of atopy. 

Seek objective evidence of airflow reversibility 
or variability to confirm the diagnosis: the former 
by spi ometry (>15% improvement in FEVt fol¬ 
lowing inhaled bronchodilators), the latter by 
asking the patient to keep a diary of peak-flow 
recordings (look for >20% diurnal variation on 
>3 days/week for 2 weeks). Consider special¬ 
ist assessment if the diagnosis is uncertain, 
especially if occupational asthma is suspected. 

Paroxysmal tachyarrhythmia may present with 
discrete episodes of breathlessness without any 
clear precipitant (although dyspnoea, when 
present, is usually aggravated by exertion). 
Consider this if 

• dyspnoea is accompanied by palpitation 

• episodes arise ‘out of the blue’ with an 
abrupt onset, or 

• the ECG shows evidence of pre-excitation 
(see Fig. 26.2, p. 233). 

If paroxysmal tachyarrhythmia is suspected, 
attempt to document the rhythm during symptoms 
(see p. 237) if necessary using an ambulatory 
recorder or smart phone ECG monitor. 

Dyspnoea that occurs predominantly at rest 
with no consistent relationship to exertion may 


Box 12.3 Features suggestive of 
psychogenic dyspnoea 


• Provoked by stressful situations 

• Inability to take a deep breath or ‘get enough air' 

• Frequent deep sighs 

• Digital/perioral tingling 

• |PaC0 2 with normal Pa0 2 on ABG 

• Short breath-holding time 


be functional. Suspect this if the patient exhibits 
typical features (Box 12.3) in the absence of 
objective evidence of cardiorespiratory disease 
(normal examination, Sp0 2 , CXR ± PFTs/serial 
PEFR). Refer for specialist assessment if there is 
diagnostic doubt or symptoms are troublesome 
or disabling despite explanation and reassurance. 


2 Pleural effusion or iHb? 

Consider these conditions early as they can be 
easily confirmed or excluded. Go to ‘Further 
evaluation of pleural effusion’ if there is CXR ± 
clinical evidence of unilateral effusion (see Fig. 
1 2.6). Always check Hb in patients with exertional 
dyspnoea, as pallor is an insensitive sign. If Hb 
is decreased, evaluate as described on page 
136 but consider other causes - especially if Hb 
is only slightly decreased or symptoms persist 
despite correction. 


3 


Any alarm features (Box 12.4)? 


Change in voice or stridor may indicate laryngeal/ 
tracheal obstruction secondary to intrinsic cancer 
or extrinsic compression (lymphoma, thyroid 
tumour or retrosternal goitre); if present, refer 
the patient urgently for endoscopic evaluation, 
e.g. fibre optic bronchoscopy/nasoendoscopy. 

Refer for urgent specialist evaluation with 
bronchoscopy ± CT to exclude lung cancer if 
the patient has risk factors (>40 years or smoking 
history) accompanied by any suspicious clinical 
or CXR features (see Box 12.4); these include 


Box 12.4 Alarm features in chronic dyspnoea 


Clinical features 

• Stridor 

• Haemoptysis 

• Weight loss 

• Change in voice 

• Persistent or non-tender cervical lympbadenopathy 

• Finger clubbing 

CXR features (see also Box 17.1, p. 163) 

• Lung mass 

• Cavitation 

• Hilar enlargement 

• Lobar collapse (persistent) 


N. ft These features are especially worrying if the patient is a 
smoker, is >40 years or has had asbestos xposure. 


12 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 




















DYSPNOEA 


Chronic dyspnoea: step-by-step assessment 


lobar collapse, which may indicate a proximal 
obstructing tumour. 

In younger non-smokers consider initial further 
evaluation with CT thorax; refer for specialist 
assessment if CT suggests malignant disease, 
fails to reveal a clear alternative cause or is 
not readily available. Evaluate patients with 
haemoptysis as described in Chapter 17. 


4 


Significant CT abnormality? 


Arrange high-resolution CT to look for evidence of 
ILD if the patient has any of the relevant features 
listed in Box 12.5. 


Box 12 5 Criteria for investigations in 
chronic dyspnoea 


PFTs if there is: 

• wheeze 

• prominent nocturnal or early morning symptoms 

• symptoms precipitated by cold weather or common 
allergens 

• history of atopy 

• clinical or CXR features of hyperinflation 
(see Fig. 12.2) 

• smoker aged >40 years 

• chronic productive cough (>3 consecutive months for 
>2 successive years) 

• occupational dust exposure, treatment with 
methotrexate/amiodarone or previous radiotherapy 

• ISp0 2 (at rest or on exertion) with no apparent 
alternative cause 

• major or progressive decrease in effort tolerance 
wthout other obvious cause. 

Echocardiogram if there is: 

• significant ECG abnormality, e.g. left bundle branch 
block, evidence of LVH, pathological Q waves, 
frequent ventricular ectopics, atrial fibrillation 

• previous Ml or chronic hypertension (especially if 
target organ damage) 

• tJVP or peripheral oedema 

• murmur (not previously investigated) 

• clinical/CXR evidence of pulmonary congestion, 
cardiomegaly or pulmonary hypertension 

• elevated BNP (BNP >35 pg/mL; N-terminal-pro BNP 
>125 pg/mL). 

High-resolution CT thorax if there is: 

• interstitial shadowing on CXR (Fig. 1 2.8) 

• unexplained restrictive lung defect or Igas transfer 

• strong clinical suspicion of interstitial lung disease, 
e.g. hypoxia or end-inspiratory crackles in a patient 
with previous exposure to birds, dust or hay. 


Refer for specialist evaluation if CT shows 
evidence of ILD or other serious pathology 
e.g. cancer, bronchiectasis. Arrange further 
investigation with PFTs, if these have not been 
performed already, if the CT shows features of 
emphysema. 


5 


Abnormal PFTs? 


Have a low threshold for requesting PFTs (Box 
12.5 and Tables 12.6 and 12.7). 

Diagnose COPD if FEV^FVC is <70% 
(indicating airways obstruction) with a post- 
bronchodilator FE\7, <80% predicted (indicating 
incomplete reversibility). Look for other charac¬ 
teristic abnormalities, including TTLC and RV 
(which helps to differentiate from ILD in borderline 
cases) and igas transfer (indicative of significant 
emphysema). Exclude alpha!-antitrypsin defi¬ 
ciency in younger patients. If Sp0 2 is <92%, 
perform an ABG to identify patients with type 
2 respiratory failure or those who might qualify 
for home oxygen therapy. 

Diagnose asthma if there is an obstructive 
ventilatory defect with >15% improvement in FEV, 
following inhaled bronchodilators. If not, consider 
further assessment with repeat spirometry, PEFR 



Fig. 12.8 CXR in interstitial lung disease. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



























DYSPNOEA 


Chronic dyspnoea: step by-step assessment 


Table 12 6 Pulmonary function tests 

Test 

Description 

Measures 

Examples of relevant diagnoses 

Spirometry 

Airflow at the mouth is 
measured during a 
forced exhalation 

FEV,, FVC 

Obstructive lung disease: disproportionate reduction 
in FEV, (FEV,:FVC ratio <0.8) 

Restrictive lung disease: proportionate reduction in 

FEV, and FVC 

Reversibility 

Spirometry is repeated after 
giving bronchodilators 

FEV,, FVC 

Complete reversibility of obstruction is common in 
asthma, incomplete reversibility common in COPD 

Lung volumes 

Gas dilution or whole-body 
plethysmography 

TLC, RV 

COPD (normal or increased TLC), restrictive lung 
disease (reduced TLC and RV) 

Diffusion 

capacity 

Carbon monoxide uptake 
from alveoli is measured 

DLCO, Dm 

Interstitial pneumonitis (low DLCO, low Dm), 
pulmonary haemorrhage (high DLCO, normal Dm) 

DLCO - lung diffusion of carbon monoxide; Dm - membrane component of diffusion; FEV, - forced expired volume in 1 second; 

FVC - forced vital capacity; RV - residual volume; TLC - total lung capacity 


12 


Table 12.7 Severity of airflow obstruction 

Severity 

> 

LU 

LL- 

Mild 

50-80% predicted 

Moderate 

30-49% predicted 

Severe 

<30% predicted 


Source: Modified from Boon NA, Colledge NR, Walker BR, 
Hunter JAA. Davidson s Principles and Practice of Medicine, 
20th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2006 (Box 19.30, 

p. 680). 


diary or specialist evaluation if there is high clinical 
suspicion or borderline spirometry results. 

In patients with a restrictive lung defect (see 
Table 12.6), evaluate for an underlying cause: 

• arrange echocardiography and reassess 
following treatment if there is evidence of 
pulmonary congestion 

• look for major chest wall deformity, e.g. 
severe kyphoscoliosis 

• exclude ILD with high-resolution CT if there 
are suggestive clinical/CXR features (Fig. 

12.8) or there is no clear alternative cause 

• measure BMI to identify massive obesity, 
e.g. BMI >40. 

Suspect extrapulmonary compression (e g. 
neuromuscular disorder, chest wall deformity) 
if there is a decrease in TLC with normal RV, 


and an intrapulmonary cause, e.g ILD, if there 
is a proportionate decrease in TLC and RV. 


6 


Significant echocardiographic 
abnormality? 


Refer for cardiology evaluation if the echo shows 
major valvular abnormality, e.g. severe mitral 
regurgitation or aortic stenosis or pericardial 
effusion 

In chronic heart failure, exertional dyspnoea 
may be the sole presenting feature, but significant 
cardiac dysfunction is unlikely in the absence 
of the features in Box 12.5. The presence and 
severity of left ventricular systolic dysfunction can 
be determined by echocardiography Consider 
cardiology referral if left ventricular systolic 
function is normal but the patient has clinical 
features suggestive of heart failure, e.g. elevated 
JVP, oedema or CXR evidence of pulmonary 
congestion - especially if there is left ventricular 
hypertrophy/left atrial dilatation (heart failure with 
preserved ejection fraction) or a history of previ¬ 
ous cardiac surgery/radiotherapy (constrictive 
pericarditis). 

If the echo suggests pulmonary hypertension 
without significant LV impairment or valvular 
disease, evaluate fully for underlying chronic 
lung disease, e.g. PFTs, high-resolution CT 
chest, sleep studies, CTPA. In the absence of 
hypoxaemia or significant lung disease, refer for 
specialist assessment. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
























DYSPNOEA 


Chronic dyspnoea: step-by-step assessment 


7 


Unexplained hypoxia or Trisk of venous 
thromboembolism? 


Exclude chronic thromboembolic disease in any 
patient with unexplained hypoxia or risk factors 
for DVT. Ventilation/perfusion lung scanning may 
have higher sensitivity for detection of chronic 
PE but CT pulmonary angiography is more likely 
to identify alternative lung pathology, e.g. ILD, 
emphysema. 


8 


Clinical suspicion of coronary 
artery disease? 


Angina occasionally manifests as a sensation 
of breathlessness without chest discomfort. 
Evaluate for angina with an exercise ECG or 
other stress test (see Box 6.8, p. 63) if the patient 
has risk factors for coronary artery disease (see 
Box 6.3, p. 52) and symptoms are consistently 
provoked by exertion and relieved within 5 
minutes by rest. Relief of symptoms with anti- 
anginal therapy or coronary revascularisation 
confirms the diagnosis. 


9 


Consider other causes. Further 
investigation if limiting, progressive or 
unexplained symptoms 


Obesity rarely causes significant cardiorespiratory 
impairment unless BMI is >40. However, lesser 
degrees of obesity and/or physical deconditioning 


are frequently responsible for exertional breath¬ 
lessness and ^exercise capacity; suspect this 
in patients with TBMI (especially >30), recent 
weight gain or a sedentary lifestyle. 

If there are features of hyperventilation (see 
Box 1 2.3) or symptoms are disproportionate to 
objective findings, perform an ABG on room air 
(ideally during symptoms) and consider referral 
for formal evaluation of psychogenic dyspnoea. 

At this stage, review any abnormalities 
detected and determine whether they are suf¬ 
ficient to account for the presentation. In patients 
with multiple possible causes for dyspnoea, e.g. 
obesity, left ventricular impairment and airways 
disease, cardiopulmonary exercise testing (in 
which ECG, respiratory gas exchange and minute 
ventilation are recorded during exercise) may 
help to establish the predominant mechanism. 
Patients with a major change or progressive 
decline in exercise capacity without adequate 
explanation require further evaluation; arrange 
an echocardiogram and PFTs if these have not 
yet been performed, and consider referral for 
specialist evaluation, e.g. cardiac catheterisation 
or cardiopulmonary exercise testing. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 












DYSPNOEA 


Chronic dyspnoea: further assessment 


Box 12.6 Causes of abnormal pleural 
fluid collections 


Serous effusions 
Transudate 

• Cardiac failure 

• Hepatic failure 

• Renal failure 

• Nephrotic syndrome 

• Hypoalbuminaemia 

• Peritoneal dialysis 

• Constrictive pericarditis 

• Hypothyroidism 

• Meigs’ syndrome (pleural effusion, benign ovarian 
fibroma and ascites) 

Exudate 

• Parapneumonic (usually bacterial) 

• Bronchial carcinoma 

• TB 

• Connective tissue disease 

• Pancreatitis 

• Mesothelioma 

• Post-Mi syndrome 

• Sarcoidosis 

Other fluids 
Pus 

• Empyema; most commonly caused by acute bacterial 
infection of the pleura 

Chyle 

• Chylothorax; caused by lymphatic obstruction, most 
commonly by metastatic cancer 

Blood 

• Haemothorax; causes acute dyspnoea, usually 
following trauma 


Box 12.7 Light’s criteria for differentiation of 
pleural exudate and transudate 


The pleural fluid is likely to be an exudate if >1 of the 
following criteria is present; 

• pleural fluid protein; serum protein ratio >0.5 

• pleural fluid LDH; serum LDH ratio >0.6 

• pleural fluid LDH >two-thirds of the upper limit of 
normal serum LDH. 


Further assessment of pleural effusion 

Box 12.6 lists the causes of abnormal collections 
of fluid in the pleura. Initial assessment depends 
on laboratory analysis of the fluid. 

• Use Light’s criteria to distinguish exudative 
from transudative effusions (Box 12 7). 

• Review pleural fluid biochemistry. The 
presence of amylase indicates pancreatitis; 
pH <7.3 suggests bacterial infection 

or cancer; rheumatoid factor suggests 
connective tissue disease. 

• Identify evidence of infection: Gram stain, 
culture, microscopy for acid-fast bacilli. TB 
culture may take months. 

• Look for evidence of malignancy: cytology 
may identify malignant cells; CT thorax 

+ needle biopsy may reveal malignancy; 
pleural biopsy of regions identified as 
abnormal may provide a diagnostic 
specimen. 


12 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















Fatigue 


Fatigue is physical and/or mental exhaustion. It 
is very common and non specific, so identifying 
significant underlying disease is difficult. Acute 
fatigue is usually caused by self-limiting infec¬ 
tions or transient life circumstances. This guide 
pertains to fatigue of at least 2 weeks’ duration. 

A care ul history may reveal that the problem 
is actually something other than fatigue, e.g. 
breathlessness, in which case this should be 
pursued. If a localizing or more specific feature, 
e.g. haemoptysis, fever, jaundice, comes to light, 
make it the primary focus of assessment. 

Causes of fatigue are shown below, with an 
emphasis on conditions that frequently present 
with fatigue as the chief complaint. Important 
problems to differentiate from fatigue are 
described in Box 13.1. 

Non-organic causes 

• Psychological stress/overwork. 

• Depress on. 

• Fibromyalgia. 

• Chronic fatigue syndrome. 

Medications 

• Beta-blockers. 

• Chronic alcohol excess. 

• Benzodiazepines and other sedatives. 

• Corticosteroids. 

• Chemotherapeutic agents. 

Malignancy 

• Flaematological. 

• Solid organ. 

• Disseminated. 


Respiratory causes 

• Obstructive sleep apnoea. 

• Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 

Cardiac causes 

• Congestive cardiac failure. 

• Bradyarrhythmias. 

Haematological causes 

• Anaemia. 

• Haematological malignancy, e.g. 
lymphoma. 

Endocrine causes 

• Hypothyroidism. 

• Hypercalcaemia. 

• Diabetes mellitus. 

• Adrenal insufficiency. 

• Hypopituitarism. 

J Infection 

• Infectious mononucleosis. 

• Tuberculosis. 

• HIV. 

• Infective endocarditis. 

• Lyme disease. 

Chronic inflammatory conditions 

• Rheumatoid arthritis. 

• Inflammatory bowel disease. 

• Connective tissue disorders, e.g. systemic 
lupus erythematosus. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 











FATIGUE 


Differential diagnosis 


131 


Box 13.1 Presentations that must be distinguished from fatigue 


Exertional dyspnoea 

Establish if the true complaint is reduced exercise 
tolerance. Quantify how far the patient can walk in 
meters/other tangible distance. Assess as described in 
Chapter 12. 

Muscle weakness 

Ask specifically about muscle weakness and formally 
assess muscle group power (see Table 22.1). If detected, 
evaluate muscle weakness as per Chapter 22. 

Excessive sleepiness 

This may result from depression, insomnia or sleep 
disordered breathing, e.g. obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA). 
Assess with the Epworth sleep score. Ask the patient’s 
partner about snoring and episodes of apnoea/hypoapnoea 
during sleep. If OSA is suspected, refer the patient for 
formal sleep studies. 

Loss of motivation 

This may result from depression, chronic stress or other 
psychosocial problems - consider it whenever a patient no 


longer participates in hobbies, interests and other activities. 
‘Tiredness 1 or ‘lack of energy' is often cited as the reason 
for giving up these activities and careful questioning may 
be required to distinguish true physical limitation from a 
lack of inclination or will. 

General debility 

Ask about a change in weight, appearance or clothes size. 
Measure weight and compare with previous records if 
available. Look for evidence of malnutrition and reduced 
muscle bulk. If present, evaluate thoroughly for an 
underlying malignant inflammatory, Gl or endocrine cause. 

Concealed concerns 

Fatigue may act as a ‘proxy’ complaint for an issue that 
the patient is reluctant to raise directly, e.g. problems 
with finances, employment, alcohol or personal/sexual 
relationships. Enquire with tact, allow time and opportunity 
for the patient to voice concerns and ask specifically about 
alcohol intake (see Box 2.1, p. 1 1). 


13 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 








FATIGUE 


Overview 


1 


Full clinical assessment 


Fatigue secondary to drug 
therapy 

._, :i „ Yes _ Consider trial 

discontinuation 

' 

No <-' 

’ 

FBC, U+E, LFTs, TFTs, ESR, CRP, Ca 2+ , glucose, urinalysis ± pregnancy test 


2 


3 


4 



No 


Anaemia/uraemia/hypothyroidism/ 
hypercalcaemia/pregnancy/diabetes mellitus/ 
bradyarrhythmia/drug-related 


Assess as per Pyrexia of unknown origin (p. 148) 


Further targeted 
evaluation 

i 

i 


Organic cause 


5 


7 



Yes 

Consider HIV/tuberculosis/Lyme disease/ 



tropical infection 

No _ 



' ’ 

Yes 

-► 


Low mood, anhedonia? 

Likely depression 

No ^_ 




Explore psychosocial factors. Assess impact on lifestyle and employment 
Consider obesity/physical deconditioning 

If persistent and otherwise unexplained, consider chronic fatigue syndrome 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


















































FATIGUE 


133 


Step-by-step assessment 


1 Likely drug culprit? 

Review all medications - prescribed and over- 
the-counter. Suspect a drug cause if there is 
a temporal relationship between a likely culprit 
(see above) and the onset of symptoms. If pos¬ 
sible, stop or replace suspect medications and 
review symptoms after an appropriate interval. 
Alcohol in excess or used chronically can cause 
fatigue. Toxic environmental exposures, e.g. 
carbon monoxide, lead, mercury, arsenic, are 
less common, but potentially reversible causes. 


Definite cause identified on examination 
or screening investigations? 

If any of the abnormalities listed below are 
detected, reassess fatigue after appropriate 
evaluation and treatment. 

Anaemia 

This may cause fatigue but is also a common 
feature of chronic disease. See ‘Further assess¬ 
ment of anaemia’ (p. 136) in any patient with J-Hb. 

Renal failure 

Uraemia is a cause of fatigue. If there is new 
or worsening renal impairment, see ‘Further 
assessment of renal failure’ (p. 230). 

Hyperca caemia 

Fatigue and other symptoms, e.g. abdominal 
pain, vomiting, constipation, polyuria, confusion 
and anorexia, may occur if corrected serum 
calcium is >3.0 mmol/L. Flypercalcaemia may 
reflect serious underlying disease, e g. bony 
metastases, squamous cell lung cancer and 
multiple myeloma. 

Firstly, check a parathyroid hormone (PTFI) 
level: 

• an t or -^>PTH suggests primary 
hyperparathyroidism. Refer to 
Endocrinology 

• if IPTH, examine the breasts (p. 48) and 
prostate, perform a CXR, a radioisotope 
bone scan and myeloma ‘screen’, review 
drugs (especially calcium or vitamin D 
supplements). If no cause is identified, 
consider a CT scan of the chest, 
abdomen and pelvis to look for underlying 
malignancy. 


Diabetes mellitus 

Formally evaluate for diabetes if the patient 
has other suggestive symptoms or an ele ated 
fasting or random blood glucose (see Clinical tool: 
Diagnosing diabetes and glycaemic complica¬ 
tions, p. 299). 

Poor glycaemic control in known diabetes 
cases may cause fatigue. Review the blood 
glucose diary and HbA 1c to determine whether 
control is adequate and, if not, reassess the 
fatigue after correction. Repeated episodes of 
hypoglycaemia may also cause fatigue, and 
should be addressed. 


Hypothyroidism 


Ask about symptoms of cold intolerance, 
constipation and weight gain, and look for 
hypothyroid facies, dry skin, brittle hair and 
nails, myxoedema and goitre. In patients with 
known hypothyroidism, consider whether thy¬ 
roxine replacement is adequate and ask about 
compliance. TTSFI and |T 4 confirms primary 
hypothyroidism. Beware the low TSH with low 
T 4 - this may indicate secondary hypothyroidism 
so perform a full pituitary hormone profile. 


13 


Bradycardia 

If HR is <60 bpm, perform an ECG and consider 
a 24-hour tape. Refer to a cardiologist if there is 
evidence of complete heart block, a resting HR 
<50 bpm or a blunted HR response to exercise. 


Pregnancy 

Consider in any woman of child-bearing age 
and, if necessary, perform a pregnancy test. 


3 


Fever, night sweats or 
Tinflammatory markers? 


Fatigue is a common, and often predominant, 
symptom in patients with systemic inflammatory 
or malignant disease, e.g. lymphoma, endocar¬ 
ditis, myeloma, tuberculosis. If there is a history 
of fever or night sweats or an TESR/CRP, review 
as described for fever and pyrexia of unknown 
origin (Chapter 14). 


4 


Other indicator of organic disease? 


Look for the following indicators of organic 
disease during your assessment. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





















FATIGUE 


Step-by-step assessment 

Abnormalities on FBC or blood film 

High or low cell counts, abnormal cells, e.g. 
blasts, or morphological abnormalities, e.g. target 
cells may indicate important haematological or 
systemic disease. Seek haematological advice 
for any unusual or unsuspected abnormality. 

| Lymphadenopathy 

Enlarged lymph nodes may occur with malig¬ 
nancy (lymphoma, leukaemia or secondary 
deposits) or in reaction to infection/inflammation. 
The most important conditions to consider are 
HIV, tuberculosis (TB), infectious mononucleosis 
and malignancy 

• Search for a local source of infection/ 
inflammation if swelling is localized to one 
lymph node group. 

• Suspect haematological malignancy 
if there is generalized painless 
lymphadenopathy. 

• Consider lymph node biopsy if the cause is 
not apparent or you suspect malignancy. 

Evidence of cardiorespiratory dysfunction 

• Look for features of cardiac failure 
(TJVP, peripheral oedema, pulmonary 
congestion) or a new murmur; if present, 
arrange an ECG and echocardiogram. 

• Check Sp0 2 at rest ± on exertion; if low, 
perform an ABG on room air and look for 
an underlying cause. 

• Ask about smoking history and consider 
CXR/pulmonary function tests (see Table 
12.5, p. 126). 

Some patients find it difficult to differentiate 
between fatigue and dyspnoea; if there is a clear 
history or objective evidence of reduced effort 
tolerance, consider a similar approach to that 
of chronic exertional dyspnoea (see Ch. 12). 


I Features of chronic liver disease or 

deranged LFTs 

Look for stigmata of chronic liver disease (Box 
19.5, p. 176). If jaundiced, assess as per Ch. 
19. If LFTs are abnormal, enquire about alcohol 
intake and discontinue hepatotoxic drugs; if the 
abnormality persists, consider a ‘liver screen’ 
(Box 19.7, p. 181). 

Features of adrenal insufficiency 

Look for pigmentation of sun-exposed areas, 
recent scars palmar creases and mucosal mem¬ 
branes; vitiligo/other autoimmune conditions; 
postural hypotension and -iNaVTKL Confirm 
with a short ACTH (Synacthen) stimulation test. 


5 


Specific infection risk? 


Consider HIV if the patient: 

• has had unprotected sex, a blood 
transfusion, done health-care work or has 
been resident in an HIV endemic area 

• has engaged in high-risk sexual activity 

• is an IV drug user, past or present. 

Consider a CXR ± Mantoux test if the patient 

has: 

• had previous TB or been resident in a TB 
endemic area 

• had recent exposure to a patient with 
active TB 

• immunosuppression. 

Consider Lyme serology if the patient has: 

• a history of a recent tick bite 

• a history of an erythema chronicum migrans 

• recently travelled to an endemic area. 
Discuss with an ID unit if the patient has: 

• recently undertaken foreign travel beyond 
Europe and North America 

• a history of a recent animal bite. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










FATIGUE 


Step by-step assessment 


135 


6 


Low mood, anhedonia? 


Suspect depression if the patient has lost 
enjoyment or interest in life (ask about previous 
interests, hobbies and so on), reports low mood 
or expresses negative thoughts (guilt, pessimism, 
low self-esteem) out of proportion to the circum¬ 
stances. Look for blunted affect, psychomotor 
retardation and biological symptoms, e.g. loss of 
libido, early morning waking. Consider psychiatric 
referral or a trial of antidepressants. 


7 


Explore psychosocial factors and impact 
on lifestyle. Consider obesity, physical 
deconditioning, chronic fatigue syndrome 


If the patent has a BMI >30 or lacks physical 
fitness, encourage appropriate lifestyle changes 
and reassess. If not already excluded consider 
coeliac disease, infectious mononucleosis and 
Lyme borreliosis. Chronic fatigue syndrome is 
a diagnosis of exclusion with specific criteria 
(Box 13.2). 


Box 13.2 Diagnostic criteria for chronic 
fatigue syndrome 


Fatigue for >4 months with all of the following: 

• a clear starting point 

• persistent and/or recurrent symptoms 

• unexplained by other conditions 

• a substantial reduction in activity level 

• characterized by post-exertional malaise and/or 
fatigue (feeling worse after physical activity) 

and one or more of the following: 

• difficulty sleeping or insomnia 

• muscle and/or joint pain without inflammation 

• headaches 

• painful lymph nodes that are not enlarged 

• sore throat or general malaise or flu-like symptoms 

• cognitive dysfunction, such as difficulty with thinking 

• physical or mental exertion that makes 
symptoms worse 

• dizziness and/or nausea 

• palpitation, without heart disease 


13 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













FATIGUE 


136 


Further assessment of anaemia 


Further assessment of anaemia 

Step 1 Use he mean cell volume (MCV) to narrow the 
differential diagnosis 

In the UK, microcytic anaemia (MCV <76 fL) is 
usually due to iron deficiency. 

First, confirm iron deficiency. Serum ferritin is 
more indicative of total body iron than serum 
iron but may be increased by liver disease or 
systemic inflammation. 

• 4-ferritin confirms iron deficiency. 

• If ferritin is normal, transferrin saturation 
<20% suggests iron deficiency. 

If iron deficiency is confirmed, identify the 
underlying cause. 

• Review the diet and consider inadequate 
iron intake, especially in vegetarians. 

• Ask about blood loss: haematemesis, 
melaena, haemoptysis, epistaxis, 
haematuria, menorrhagia, trauma. 

• Arrange UGIE and colonoscopy unless 
there is a clear non-GI source of bleeding, 
e.g. menorrhagia, haematuria. 

Where the cause remains unclear 

• exclude coeliac disease: serology + 
duodenal biopsy at the time of UGIE 

• refer to Gl for further investigation, e.g. 
small bowel pathology. 

Reassess symptoms and FBC after iron sup¬ 
plementation and treatment of any underlying 
cause 

Refer patients with a 4-MCV and normal 
iron stores to a haematologist for investigation 
of alternative diagnoses, e.g. thalassaemia, 
sideroblastic anaemia. 

In patients with a macrocytic anaemia (MCV 
>98 fL), measure vitamin B 12 and fasting serum 
folate. 

In the absence of pregnancy, causative drugs, 
e.g. methotrexate, phenytoin, or haemolysis (see 
below), 4-folate is likely to be due to poor dietary 
intake (fruit, leafy vegetables) but always check 
coeliac serology. 

4-B 12 is unlikely to be due to dietary deficiency 
unless the patient is a strict vegan. Check for 
previous gastrectomy or small bowel surgery, 
then investigate for pernicious anaemia. Intrinsic 
factor antibodies are diagnostic but only present 
in 60% of cases; anti-parietal cell antibodies are 
non-specific but their absence makes pernicious 


anaemia less likely (present in 90% of cases). 
Seek Flaematology advice in difficult cases. 

If B 12 and folate are normal, exclude hypo¬ 
thyroidism, pregnancy and alcoholic liver disease, 
and then evaluate for haemolysis (Step 2) and 
myelodysplasia (Step 3), as described below. 

Measure iron studies and vitamin B 12 /folate in 
patients with normocytic anaemia, as combined 
iron and B 12 or folate deficiencies, e.g. nutritional 
deficiency, small bowel disease, may result in a 
normocytic picture. 

Step 2 Investigate for haemolysis 

Consider haemolysis in patients with normal or 
Tmcv. 

Seek evidence of Tred cell destruction: 

• Tbilirubin/LDH 

• Turinary urobilinogen 

• red cell fragments on blood film 

and a compensatory increase in red cell 
production: 

• Treticulocytes 

• polychromasia 

• nucleated red cell precursors on blood film. 
If present, distinguish intravascular from 
extravascular haemolysis to narrow the differential 
diagnosis. 

Intravascular haemolysis, e.g. in microangio¬ 
pathic haemolytic anaemia (MAFIA), defective 
mechanical heart valve, malaria - releases free 
Hb into the plasma, leading to 

• 4-plasma haptoglobins (mop up free Hb 
then cleared by the liver) 

• methaemalbuminaemia (once haptoglobin 
binding is saturated) 

• haemosiderinuria (once albumin binding 
capacity exceeded) 

• haemoglobinuria (black urine if fulminant, 
e.g. in malaria). 

With extravascular haemolysis, e.g. hereditary 
spherocytosis, autoimmune haemolysis or red 
cell enzymopathies, these features are absent 
and there is often clinical or USS evidence of 
splenomegaly (the site of red cell breakdown) 
In either case, review the blood film for 
diagnostic abnormalities: 

• malaria parasites on thick and thin films 
(mandatory if recent travel to malaria 
endemic region) 

• sickle cells - sickle cell anaemia 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





FATIGUE 


Further assessment of anaemia 


137 


• red cell fragments - MAHA, e.g. 
haemolytic uraemic syndrome, 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura; 
defective mechanical heart valve, march 
haemoglobinuria 

• spherocytes - autoimmune haemolytic 
anaemia or hereditary spherocytosis 

• Heinz bodies, bite cells - G-6-PD 
deficiency. 

Discuss immediately with a haematologist if 
you suspect haemolytic uraemic syndrome or 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, e.g. AKI, 
neurological features, acute diarrhoeal illness. 
If spherocytes are present, perform a direct 
Coombs test to help differentiate autoimmune 
haemolyt c anaemia from hereditary spherocy¬ 
tosis. If the cause is unclear, consider enzyme 
assays (G-6-PD or pyruvate kinase deficiency) 
and Hb electrophoresis (haemoglobinopathies) 
and refer to a haematologist. 

Step 3 Seek evidence of bone marrow failure or 
haematological malignancy 

Review the FBC and blood film for: 

• deficiencies in other cell lines 
(4-WBC, 4-platelets) 

• TWBC, e.g. chronic myeloid leukaemia, 
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia 

• atypical cells, e.g. blasts. 

Examine for lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly, 
and refer for further investigation, e.g. bone 
marrow evaluation. 

Look for evidence of a paraproteinaemia, 
e.g. multiple myeloma: send serum for protein 


electrophoresis and urine for measurement of 
Bence Jones protein. Discuss with a haematolo¬ 
gist if these are positive or if there is clinical 
suspicion, e.g. bone pain, pathological fracture, 
lytic bone lesions, unexplained TCa 2+ or ESR. 


Step 4 Consider chronic non-haematological disease 

Consider chronic kidney disease as a potential 
cause for normocytic (4-erythropoietin production) 
if GFR <60 mLVmin/1.73 m 2 , and especially if 
<30 mL/min/1.73 m 2 . Measure ferritin and 
transferrin saturation to ensure that the patient 
is iron-replete (ferritin >100 ng/mL; transferrin 
saturation >20%) and discuss with a nephrologist. 

The most common cause of normocytic 
anaemia is chronic inflammatory disease, e.g. 
rheumatoid arthritis, polymyalgia rheumatica, 
chronic infection or malignancy. Consider the 
diagnosis if: 

• other causes of 4-Hb have been excluded 
(including iron, B 12 , folate deficiency) 

• there is no evidence of active bleeding 

• anaemia is mild, e.g. Hb>80 g/L, and 

• unexplained weight loss, fever, TESR/ 

CRP or 4-albumin - search for an 
underlying cause. 


13 


Step 5 Refer to a haematologist 

Seek input from a haematologist if the cause of 
anaemia is still unclear, you suspect a serious or 
unusual haematological disorder or the patient 
fails to respond to therapy. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 




Fever 


Fever (or pyrexia) is a body temperature >99th 
percentile of the healthy adult maximum; in 
clinical practice, a temperature >38°C is usually 
regarded as significant. Extreme fever (>41°C) 
is life threatening and tends to occur with gram 
negative bacteraemia, drug reactions, e.g. neuro¬ 
leptic malignant syndrome, intracranial pathology 
(leading to central temperature dysregulation) 
or extreme environmental conditions. Pyrexia 
of unknown origin (PUO) is documented fever 
that persists without explanation for 2-3 weeks 
despite investigation. 

Fever occurs most commonly as part of the 
acute phase response to infection. Sepsis is 
defined as life-threatening organ dysfunc¬ 
tion due to a dysregulated host response to 
infection’* *; it carries a significant mortality and 
must be recognized and managed quickly. Other 
causes of fever are malignancy, connective tissue 
disease, drug reactions, miscellaneous causes 
and fictitious fever. 

*Singer M Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et 
at. The Third International Consensus Definitions 
for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA 
2016 Feb 23;315(8):801-10. 


Infection 

Respiratory system 

• Acute bronchitis. 

• Pneumonia. 

• Influenza. 

• Empyema. 

• Infective exacerbation of bronchiectasis/ 
COPD. 

• Tuberculosis (TB). 

Fjj Gl causes 

• Gastroenteritis. 

• Appendicitis. 

• Biliary sepsis. 


• Viral hepatitis. 

• Diverticulitis. 

• Intra-abdominal TB. 

• Hepatic abscess. 

]] Skin/soft tissue 

• Cellulitis. 

• Erysipelas. 

• Necrotizing fasciitis. 

• Pyomyositis. 

• Infected pressure sore. 

• Wound infection. 

Musculoskeletal causes 

• Septic arthritis (native and prosthetic joint), 

• Osteomyelitis. 

• Discitis. 

• Epidural abscess. 

Genitourinary tract 

Lower urinary tract infection (UTI), 
e.g. cystitis, prostatitis. 

• Upper UTI (pyelonephritis). 

• Perinephric collection. 

• Pelvic inflammatory disease. 

• Epididymo-orchitis. 

• Syphilis. 

CNS 

• Meningitis (bacterial, viral, fungal, TB). 

• Encephalitis. 

• Cerebral abscess. 

ENT 

• Upper respiratory tract infection (RTI), e.g. 
tonsillitis. 

• Otitis media. 

• Quinsy. 

• Dental abscess. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 












Differential diagnosis 


139 


• Mumps/parotitis. 

• Glandular fever (Epstein-Barr virus; EBV). 

• Sinusitis. 

Immunocompromised patients 

• Pneumocystis proved (carinii) pneumonia. 

• Aspergillosis. 

• TB. 

• Atypical mycobacterial infection, e.g. 
Mycobacterium avium intracellutare. 

• Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection. 

• Toxoplasmosis. 

• Cryptococcal meningitis. 

• Nocardia infection. 

• Disseminated herpes/fungal infection. 

Returning travellers 

• Malaria. 

• Typhoid. 

• Infective diarrhoea, e.g. cholera, 
amoebiasis, Shigella. 

• Amoebic liver abscess. 

• Strongyloides infection. 

• Schistosomiasis. 

• Dengue. 

• Chikungunya 

Other infectious causes 

• Leptospirosis. 

• Brucellosis. 

• Lyme disease. 

• Q fever. 

• HIV. 

• Toxoplasmosis. 

• Fungal infection. 

• Measles, rubella. 

• Herpes zoster infection (chickenpox or 
shingles). 

Malignancy 

• Haematological malignancy, including 
lymphoma, leukaemia, myeloma. 


• Solid tumours, especially renal, liver, colon, 
pancreas. 

Connective tissue disorders 

• Giant cell arteritis/polymyalgia rheumatica. 

• Rheumatoid arthritis. 

• Systemic lupus erythematosus 

• Polymyositis. 

• Polyarteritis nodosa. 

• Wegener’s granulomatosis. 

• Churg-Strauss disease. 

• Cryoglobulinaemia. 

• Adult-onset Still’s disease. 

Drugs 

• Drug fever (almost any drug). 

• Antipsychotics (neuroleptic malignant 
syndrome). 

• Anaesthetics (malignant hyperthermia). 

• Cocaine, amphetamines, ecstasy 

Other causes 

• Transfusion-associated. 

• Thyrotoxicosis, thyroiditis. 

• Phaeochromocytoma. 

• Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)/pulmonary 
embolism (PE). 

• Pancreatitis. 

• Alcoholic hepatitis/delirium tremens. 

• Rheumatic fever. 

• Inflammatory bowel disease. 

• Sarcoidosis. 

• Atrial myxoma. 

• Familial Mediterranean fever. 

• Erythroderma/Stevens-Johnson syndrome. 

• Fictitious (fever or apparent fever 
surreptitiously engineered by the patient). 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

















FEVER 


140 “ T . 

Overview 


1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 



downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

















































FEVER 


Step-by-step assessment 


141 


New qSOFA score >1 (Box 14.1) or >1 
high risk feature? 

Unless you suspect a non-infective cause for 
fever (see step 2) use the qSOFA score (Box 
1 4.1) to rapidly identify sepsis pending lab data/ 
ABG/urine output trends: diagnose sepsis if 
qSOFA score >1 (assume baseline score of 
zero unless known pre-existing organ dysfunc¬ 
tion). Also diagnose sepsis if >1 of the following 
features is present: 

• Hypoxia (e.g. Pa0 2 /Fi0 2 <53.3 KPa or 
supplemental 0 2 required to maintain Sp0 2 
>94%) 

• Hypotension (e.g. MAP <70 mmHg; SBP 
<100 mmHq or need for inotropes) 

• GCS <15 

• Oliguria: (e.g. not passed urine for >12 hours 
or urine output <0.5 ml/kg/hr) 

• Serum creatinine >110 gmol/L or >50% rise 
from baseline. 

• Bilirubin >20 pmol/L 

• Platelets <150 x 10 9 /L 

Manage all patients with suspected sepsis in 
accordance with the Surviving Sepsis guidelines 
(http://www.survivingsepsis.org/GUIDELINES/ 
Pages/default. aspx) while searching for a focus 
of infection - see Clinical tool: A septic screen 
(p. 142). 

Assess haemodynamic status frequently 
(see Ch. 30) and manage as septic shock if 
there is persistent hypotension (mean arterial 
pressure [MAP] <65 mmHg) and Tserum 
lactate (>2 mmol/L) despite adequate volume 
esuscitation. 


2 


Suspect non-infective cause for fever? 


Most acute febrile illnesses are caused by 
infection, but the following conditions are 


Box 14.1 qSOFA (quick SOFA) criteria 

• Respiratory rate > 22/min 

1 point 

• Altered mentat on (e.g. GCS <15) 

1 point 

• Systolic blood pressure < 100 mmHg 

1 point 


potentially life-threatening and important to 
recognize immediately; they may be overlooked 
if not specifically considered at the outset 

If the patient is receiving blood products, stop 
the transfusion, ensure the patient’s ID matches 
that on the unit, and check that the ABO and 
RhD groups in the transfused blood are compat¬ 
ible with the patient. Contact the blood bank 
and seek immediate Haematology input if there 
is any suspicion of ABO incompatibility or other 
major transfusion reaction. Otherwise, monitor 
temperature and vital signs, and consider restart¬ 
ing the transfusion at a slower rate if observations 
are stable, the patient is systemically well and 
the rise in temperature is <1.5°C. 

Suspect neuroleptic malignant syndrome if the 
patient has received neuroleptics, e.g. haloperidol, 
within the past 1-4 weeks and exhibits muscular 
rigidity, tremor and excessive sweating and/or 
altered mental status, especially in association 
with TCK. 

If appropriate, ask the patient about recent 
use of cocaine, ecstasy or amphetamines; 
consider toxic hyperthermia if temperature 
is >39°C, especially if there are features of 
excessive sympathomimetic activity, e.g. TBP, 
Thr, dilated pupils, aggression, psychosis or 
serotonin syndrome, e.g. rigidity, hyper-reflexia. 
Measure CK, U+E, LFTs and coagulation, and 
monitor ECG, HR, BP and urine output, to identify 
complications such as rhabdomyolysis, acute renal 
failure, arrhythmia, disseminated intravascular 
coagulation and acute liver failure. 

Assume malignant hyperthermia if the patient 
develops severe pyrexia with tachycardia ± 
rhabdomyolysis during administration of, or within 
1-2 hours of exposure to, a volatile anaesthetic, 
e.g. halothane or succinylcholine. 

Suspect heatstroke if the patient has had 
sustained exposure to very hot weather, e.g. 
during a heatwave or has been undertaking 
prolonged severe exertion in high temperatures. 

In all of the above cases continue to evaluate 
for infection and other causes if there is any 
diagnostic doubt. 


14 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













FEVER 


Step-by-step assessment 


Clinical tool 

A septic screen 


The septic screen combines clinical assessment with 
laboratory analysis and imaging studies to identify a source 
of infection. It may also reveal non-infectious causes 
of pyrexia, e.g. malignancy. The full screen may not be 
required in all patients, especially if there is an obvious 
focus of infection. 

General 

• >2 sets of blood cultures, urinalysis, FBC, U+E, LFTs, 
CRP, CXR. 

Respiratory 

• Assess suspected RTI e.g. new/worsening 

cough with purulent sputum or CXR consolidation as 
per page 123. 

• Perform a pleural tap and send fluid for biochemical, 
microbiological and cytological analysis if unilateral 
pleural effusion (p. 129). 

• If other respiratory features, e.g. haemoptysis, non¬ 
specific CXR hypoxia, consider further investigation, 
e.g. CT, bronchoscopy to exclude atypical infection, 
lung cancer and PE. 

Abdominal 

• Send stool samples for microscopy, culture and 
sensitivity testing ± Clostridium difficile toxin if acute 
diarrhoea. 

• Investigate for inflammatory bowel disease, e.g. flexible 
sigmoidoscopy, if persistent bloody diarrhoea. 

• Perform an urgent ascitic tap in any febrile patient 
with ascites; treat empirically as spontaneous 
bacterial peritonitis (SBP), pending culture, if >250 
neutrophils/pi ascitic fluid. Consider TB and 
malignancy if fluid is exudative and initial cultures 
negative. 


• If new-onset jaundice, arrange an abdominal USS and 
serology for viral hepatitis 

Treat empirically for biliary sepsis and 
arrange surgical review if there is a cholestatic 
pattern of jaundice (p. 176) or USS shows dilated 
bile ducts. 

Send blood and urine samples for leptospirosis 
culture and serology ± PCR if symptoms include 
purpura, Iplatelets or conjunctival congestion, 
or there has been recent exposure to potentially 
contaminated water, e.g. freshwater sports, sewage 
worker - liaise with the ID team. 

• Check amylase and assess as described 

in Chapter 4 if acute abdominal pain with tenderness 
or guarding. 

• If palpable abdominal mass investigate for infective, 
e.g. diverticular or appendiceal abscess, and non- 
infective, e.g. carcinoma, lymphoma, causes with USS 
or CT ± aspiration or biopsy. 

Urinary tract 

• Send an MSU if new-onset urinary tract symptoms, 
an indwelling urinary catheter or leucocytes/nitrites on 
urinalysis (bacterial UTI highly unlikely in the absence 
of either nitrites or leucocytes.) 

• Arrange USS to exclude renal obstruction, calculus 
or a perinephric collection if loin pain or renal angle 
tenderness. 

• Exclude urinary ract cancer ± inflammatory renal 
disease (see Ch. 16) if persistent haematuria 
(visible or non-visible) or loin pain with repeated 
negative MSU. 

• Send swabs for Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia 
if urethral or PV discharge. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










FEVER 


143 


Step by-step assessment 


A 

Clinical tool—cont’d 

A septic screen 



Skin and soft tissue 

Cardiovascular 


• Send swabs from any wounds or sites discharging pus 

• Investigate for endocarditis (Box 14.2) with a 


• Suspect cellulitis if there is an area of acutely hot 

transthoracic echocardiogram and >3 sets of blood 


erythematous and painful skin; look for potential entry 

cultures if new murmur, vasculitic/embolic phenomena 


sites, e.g. peripheral cannulae, skin breaks 

or a predisposing cardiac lesion with no obvious 


• Seek immediate surgical assessment and give IV 

alternative source of infection. 


antibiotics if any features of severe necrotizing 

• Consider a transoesophageal echocardiogram if 


infection, e.g. rapid spread, crepitus, anaesthesia over 

transthoracic images equivocal or persistent high 


lesion, major haemodynamic compromise or pain out 

clinical suspicion. 


of proportion with clinical findings. 

• DVT may produce a low-grade fever - exclude as 
described on page 193 if acutely swollen limb. 

ENT 

• Consider a throat swab for influenza during outbreaks 


• Consider investigation for osteomyelitis, e.g. bone 

or the autumn/winter season. 


scan, if persistent non-healing ulcer. 

• Send a swab for Streptococcus pyogenes if pustular 


• Examine the whole body for rashes - seek urgent 

exudates. 


dermatology advice if blistering, mucosal involvement 

• If parotitis or tender lymphadenopathy, 


or pustules (see Ch. 27). 

consider a throat swab for mumps PCR and, 


CNS 

• Assume CNS infection, initially, if severe 

if age-appropriate, check EBV serology (>95% of 
patients >35 years will have evidence of previous 
exposure). 


headache, meningism, purpuric rash, focal 
neurological signs, new-onset seizures or unexpained 
IGCS. Give immediate empirical treatment after blood 

Musculoskeletal 

■14 

• If acutely swollen, painful joint, seek urgent orthopaedic 


cultures, arrange urgent neuroimaging and, 

assessment and perform diagnostic aspiration to 


if no contraindications (p. 170), perform lumbar 

exclude septic arthritis (see Ch. 20). 


puncture. 

• If unexplained back pain with no other obvious source 


• If meningitis suspected, send a throat swab for 

for fever, take >3 blood cultures and arrange spinal 


Neisseria meningitidis PCR. 

MRI to exclude discitis. 



downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










FEVER 


Step-by-step assessment 


3 


Specific risk factor for infection? 


Infections other than those discussed above may 
need to be considered in patients returning to or 
entering the UK from abroad (especially from the 
tropics) and those who are immunocompromised 
or with IV drug use. 

If the patient has come from an at-risk 
region for viral haemorrhagic fever and has 
unexplained bleeding, discuss urgently with 
the health protection team (before admission). 
Otherwise, complete a septic screen as per 
‘Clinical tool: Extensions to the septic screen 
in specific patient groups’. The prevailing strains 
and resistance patterns of common infections 
such as pneumonia may differ in other parts of 
the world so seek input from an ID specialist 
at an early stage. 

Immunocompromised patients may experi¬ 
ence more severe sequelae from infection 
with common pathogens and are at greater 
risk of opportunistic infections, especially 
with mycobacteria, viruses and fungi. Follow 
the additional steps for immunocompromise 
(Clinical tool: Extensions to the septic screen 
in specific patient groups) if the patient has an 
acquired or congenital immunodeficiency (includ¬ 
ing HIV); is receiving treatment with high-dose 
steroids, immunosuppressants, DMARDs or anti- 
TNF drugs; or is neutropenic for any reason. 
More specific forms of immunocompromise 
include asplenia (Tsusceptibility to encapsulated 
organisms and malaria) and the presence of 
indwelling vascular access devices or other 
prosthetic material. Test for HIV in patients who 
are at high risk or who present with an atypical 
infection or other indicators of HIV - see http:// 
www.bhiva.org/documents/Guidelines/Testing/ 
GlinesHIVTest08.pdf. 

Ask about all forms of drug use in any patient 
presenting with unexplained fever. If there has 
been IV drug use, establish frequency, duration 
and sites of injection. Maintain awareness of any 
local/national outbreaks, as unusual organisms 
may be implicated, e.g. anthrax skin infections. 
Always consider the possibility of underlying 
blood borne infection, e.g. hepatitis B or C, 
HIV. Discuss with the ID team if the patient 
is haemodynamically compromised or fails to 
improve on standard therapy. 


Box 14.2 Modified Duke criteria for the diagno¬ 
sis of infective endocarditis 


Major criteria 
Positive blood culture 

• Typical organism from two cultures 

• Persistent positive blood cultures taken >12 hours 
apart 

• >3 positive cultures taken over >1 hour 
Endocardial involvement 

• Positive echocardiographic findings of vegetations 

• New valvular regurgitation 

Minor criteria 

• Predisposing valvular or cardiac abnormality 

• IV drug misuse 

• Pyrexia >38°C 

• Embolic phenomenon 

• Vasculitic phenomenon 

• Blood cultures suggestive - organism grown but not 
achieving major criteria 

• Suggestive echocardiographic findings 

Definite endocarditis: two major, or one major and three 
minor, or five minor 

Possible endocarditis: one major and one minor, 
or three minor 


Modified from Boon NA, ColledgeNR, Walker BR, Hunter JAA. 
Davidson's Principles and Practice of Medicine, 20th edn. 
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2006. 


Clinical findings/initial tests suggest 
a likely source? 

Following appropriate cultures, treat immediately 
with antibiotics according to the likely source and 
local guidelines in patients with severe sepsis. If 
no clear source is identified or the patient has 
neutropenia (especially if the neutrophil count 
is <1.0 x 10 9 /L) or other significant immuno¬ 
compromise, provide empirical broad-spectrum 
antibiotic ± antifungal therapy. The choice of 
antimicrobials will depend on patient factors and 
local resistance patterns - discuss with Microbiol¬ 
ogy and other relevant specialties, e.g. Oncology, 
Haematology. Refine the antibiotic regimen in 
discussion with the Microbiology team on the 
basis of subsequent culture results. 

Patients with recurrent fever, or fever in the 
absence of immunocompromise, neutropenia or 
haemodynamic disturbance can often wait for 
the results of cultures before antibiotic therapy 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 












Step by-step assessment 


145 


is started. If there is a clear source of infection, 
start empirical antibiotic therapy and adjust as 
necessary in light of the culture results and 
sensitivity testing; otherwise, reassess daily whilst 
awaiting the full results of the septic screen. 


5 


Positive cultures? 


Re-evaluate your initial diagnosis and treatment 
in the light of culture results. 

Positive cultures may confirm a suspected 
source of infection, e.g. MSU, sputum and 
guide the most appropriate antibiotic therapy. 
On the other hand, blood cultures that yield 
an unexpected organism may challenge your 
working diagnosis and prompt re-evaluation for 
an alternative source, e.g. Staphylococcus aureus 
in suspected UTI. 

In the patient with no obvious source of fever, 
positive blood cultures, especially in multiple 


bottles, confirm an infective aetiology and help 
to guide further investigation; for example, blood 
culture results are central to the diagnosis of 
infective endocarditis (see Box 14.2). 

Persistently positive blood cultures despite 
appropriate antibiotic therapy suggest a deep- 
seated infection; the source must be identified 
and removed, e.g. debridement, drainage. 


6 


Persistent fever? 


Acute fever is frequently a manifestation of self- 
limiting viral illnesses. In the absence of continuing 
pyrexia, ongoing symptoms or signs, or worrying 
investigation results, no further action is required. 

Recurrent fever, especially with persistent 
elevation of inflammatory markers or significant 
constitutional upset, mandates further evaluation; 
if present, proceed to ‘Further assessment of 
pyrexia of unknown origin'. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 









FEVER 


Step-by-step assessment 


Clinical tool 

Extensions to the septic screen in specific patient groups 


Recent travel or residence abroad 

• Document exactly where the patient has been, specific 
dates of travel and activities undertaken (including 

a sexual history). Ask about vaccinations/malaria 
prophylaxis prior to and during travel. 

• Consult an ID specialist at an early stage for any 
returning traveller with unexplained fever. 

• Exclude malaria if they are a recent traveller to an 
endemic region (http://www.cdc.gov/malaria/about/ 
distribution.htmi) with three sets of blood films ± 
malaria antigen card: 

use the antigen card to facilitate rapid diagnosis, 
particularly if acutely unwell, but also send films as 
the card may miss parasitaemia of <0.5% and is 
not accurate for speciation 
take films over a 72-hour period, ideally after a 
fever spike, as this is when parasitaemia is highest 
discuss any positive case immediately with an ID 
specialist and refer to the British Infection 
Society treatment guidance at http:// 
www.journalofinfection.com/article/s0163- 
4453(16)00047-5/fulltext, 

• If fever is accompanied by diarrhoea, isolate the patient 
and note all recent travel history on stool specimen 
requests. Discuss immediately with Microbiology and 
ID teams if any suspicion of cholera, e.g. refugee/aid 
worker in high-risk area. 

• Send blood and stool cultures for typhoid if high 
fever, constitutional upset and recent travel to Asia 
(especially the Indian subcontinent), Africa (especially 
sub-Saharan) or Latin America. Discuss urgently with 
the ID team, especially if suggestive clinical features, 
e.g. rose coloured spots over the trunk, relative 
bradycardia, constipation. 

• Consider acute schistosomiasis if exposure to 
potentially infested water, e.g. freshwater swimming, 
rafting, water sports in Africa, South America or 
Asia, within the past 8 weeks, +/- eosinophilia, 
hepatosplenomegaly, RUQ tenderness, bloody 
diarrhoea or urticarial rash. Send blood for serology 
and discuss with an ID specialist. 

• Arrange USS to exclude amoebic abscess if 
previous travel to the tropics and RUQ discomfort ± 
palpable liver. 


• Check dengue fever serology if recent return from 
the tropics/subtropics and an acute febrile illness 
associated with a rash (generalized, blanching, macular 
in the initial stages), headache or severe aches and 
pains. Discuss immediately with the ID team if any 
suspicion of dengue haemorrhagic fever (epistaxis, Gl 
bleeding, petechia, purpura, 4-platelets, coagulopathy) 
or dengue shock syndrome (J.BP, 4-capillary refill time, 
organ dysfunction). 

• Send blood for Chikungunya serology/viral PCR if 
recent travel to an endemic region. 

Immunocompromise 

• In patients with HIV, check the most recent CD4 
count and repeat if >3 months ago. Fungal and viral 
infections are more likely if CD4 count <200 but can 
occur at higher counts. Check compliance with anti¬ 
retroviral therapy/antimicrobial prophylaxis. 

• Seek early advice from a respiratory specialist if 
there are respiratory symptoms or an abnormal CXR 
(especially cavitation) cavitation, or a high suspicion of 
Pneumocystis pneumonia due to any of the following 
features: 

subacute, e.g. over 2-3 weeks, or progressive 
shortness of breath 
non-productive cough 

diffuse bilateral perihilar infiltrates on CXR or non¬ 
specific changes 

unexplained hypoxaemia (including desaturation 
on exercise). 

• Send sputum, for microscopy (acid-fast bacilli, 
fungal), histopathological analysis (Pneumocystis) 
and mycobacterial culture; if necessary, induce 
sputum by nebulized hypertonic saline in a 
negative-pressure environment and discuss need for 
other diagnostic procedures, e.g. bronchoalveolar 
lavage. 

• If prominent Gl symptoms, send blood for Strongyloides 
serology and consider investigation for CMV colitis, e.g. 
flexible sigmoidoscopy + biopsy and intra-abdominal 
TB, e.g. CT abdomen/pelvis ± targeted biopsy (samples 
must be sent in saline, not formalin, as acid-fast bacilli 
are destroyed). 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 









Step by-step assessment 


147 


A 


Clinical tool—cont’d 

Extensions to the septic screen in specific patient groups 


If CNS features, investigate as per the general septic 
screen but send blood for Toxoplasma serology, 
request CSF staining for Cryptococcus and TB, and 
biopsy any space-occupying lesion. 

Request a dermatology review and biopsy of any 
suspicious or unusual rashes, e.g. cutaneous T-cell 
lymphomas, Kaposi's sarcoma. 

Prolonged indwelling vascular access catheters, e.g. 
Hickman lines, tunnelled lines, carry a substantial risk 
of bacterial/fungal infection; suspect line infection in all 
cases where there is no clear alternative source, even 
if the entry point looks clean. 

Take blood cultures from the line and, if feasible, 
remove sending the tip for culture. 

Conside echocardiography to look for endocarditis 
in patients with confirmed bacteraemia - especially 
S aureus or persistent fever. 


• Discuss early with the relevant specialty if you suspect 
infection of prosthetic material, e.g. valve prosthesis, 
pacemaker and prosthetic joint. 

IV drug use 

• Take >3 sets of blood cultures prior to starting 
antibiotic therapy. 

• Look at all new and old injection sites; if inflamed or 
tender, consider USS to exclude an underlying abscess. 

• Arrange a Doppler USS to exclude DVT if there is any 
groin or leg swelling 

• Exclude ilio-psoas abscess by CT if there is groin or 
lower back pain with difficulty extending the leg. 

• Arrange an echocardiogram ± transoesophageal 
echoca diography if there is no clear alternative source 
of fever or there is evidence of septic emboli on CXR 
(see Box 14.2). 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










148 


FEVER 


Further assessment 


Further assessment of pyrexia of 
unknown origin 

Perform additional screening investigations (Box 
14.3) in any patient with persistent unexplained 
fever. These may reveal a diagnosis or provide 
useful leads for further investigation. 

• Discuss the significance of any positive 
serology with the ID/Microbiology team 
and a positive ANA, ENA or ANCA with the 
Rheumatology team. 

• Biopsy any suspicious masses or 
lymphadenopathy (including bilateral hilar 
lymphadenopathy) detected clinically or 
radiologically 

• If an abscess is identified, request a 
surgical opinion regarding drainage. 

• Discuss with Haematology and consider 
bone marrow examination if Bence Jones 
protein, paraproteinaemia or a significant 


Box 14.3 Further screening tests in pyrexia of 
unknown origin 


Ensure that a full septic screen (see above) is carried 

out, plus: 

Clinical 

• Repeat a full clinical assessment, including travel, 
sexual occupational and recreational history; lymph 
nodes skin and eye examination; urinalysis; PR; 
breast and testicular examination. 

Microbiological 

• Serology for HIV, viral hepatitis (A-E), EBV, CMV, 
toxoplasmosis, Q fever, Lyme disease, brucellosis 
syphilis, Chlamydia, Bartonella and Yersinia. 

• Serology for leishmaniasis, amoebiasis, 
trypanosomiasis and schistosomiasis if there has 
been travel to the developing world. 

• Tuberculin (Mantoux) test and three early morning 
urine specimens for TB microscopy and culture. 

• Antistreptolysin 0 titre. 

Biochemistry/immunology/haematology 

• ANA, RF, ANCA 

• FBC with peripheral blood film, ferritin, LDH, CK, 

Ca 2+ , plasma electrophoresis, TFTs, prostate-specific 
antigen (if male patient >50 years). 

• Urine for Bence Jones protein. 

Radiological 

• CT chest/abdomen/pelvis. 

• Echocardiogram. 


blood film abnormality, e.g. atypical 
lymphocytes. 

• Arrange muscle biopsy if TCK, to exclude 
inflammatory myositis. 

• Perform a radioisotope bone scan to 
look for evidence of malignancy or 
osteomyelitis if persistent bony pain, TCa 2+ , 
Tprostate-specific antigen or Talkaline 
phosphatase (with otherwise normal LFTs). 

• If LFTs persistently deranged or 
hepatomegaly without an obvious cause, 
request a liver biopsy (with material for 
culture) to look for TB, sarcoidosis and 
granulomatous hepatitis. 

• If persistent haematuria/proteinuria with 
negative MSU, discuss with the Renal 
team and consider renal biopsy to exclude 
glomerulonephritis. 

• Use the Duke (see Box 1 4.2) and Jones 
criteria (Box 14.4) to confirm or refute a 
suspected diagnosis of endocarditis or 
rheumatic fever respectively 


Box 14.4 Jones criteria for the diagnosis of 
rheumatic fever 


Major manifestations 

• Carditis 

• Polya thritis 

• Chorea 

• Erythema marginatum 

• Subcutaneous nodules 

Minor manifestations 

• Fever 

• Arthralgia 

• Previous rheumatic fever 

• tESR or CRP 

• Leucocytosis 

• First-degree atrioventricular block 

PLUS 

• Supporting evidence of preceding streptococcal 
infection: recent scarlet fever, raised antistreptolysin 
0 or other streptococcal antibody titre, positive throat 
culture 

N.B. Evidence of recent streptococcal infection 
is particularly important if there is only one major 
manifestation. 


From Boon NA, ColledgeNR, Walker BR, Hunter JAA. Davidson's 
Principles and Practice of Medicine, 20th edn. Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone, 2006 (p. 617). 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
















Further assessment 


149 


Consider an ANCA-negative systemic 
vasculitis if palpable purpura, skin ulceration 
or livedo reticularis. Measure serum 
cryoglobulins (cryoglobulinaemic vasculitis); 
consider arteriography, e.g. renal, 
mesenteric or tissue biopsy if polyarteritis 
nodosa is suspected, e.g. eosinophilia, 
renal impairment, TBP, constitutional upset. 
If TESR in a patient >50 years: 

• treat for giant cell arteritis and arrange 
temporal artery biopsy if there is 
headache, visual loss, scalp tenderness 
or an inflamed, thickened, pulseless or 
tender temporal artery 

• diagnose polymyalgia rheumatica if there 
is any proximal joint pain or stiffness 

- review the diagnosis if there is no 
response to systemic steroids within 
72 hours. 


Suspect adult-onset Still’s disease 
if microbiological and autoimmune 
investigations are consistently negative and 
there are recurrent joint pains or a transient, 
non-pruritic, salmon-pink maculopapular 
rash that coincides with fever, especially if 
TTTferritin. 

Review all drugs: discontinue one at a time 
for 72 hours and then reinstate if fever 
persists. 

If the cause remains unclear, consider a 
whole body PET scan to look for evidence 
of occult malignancy (e.g. lymphoma) 
or vasculitis, bone marrow biopsy or 
liver biopsy, and consider diagnoses of 
exclusion, e.g. Behget’s disease, familial 
Mediterranean fever, fictitious fever. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 




15 


Gastrointestinal 
haemorrhage: haematemesis 
and rectal bleeding 


Haematemesis is the vomiting of blood from the 
upper Gl tract. Bright red blood or clots imply active 
bleeding and are a medical emergency. Altered 
blood with a dark granular appearance (‘coffee- 
grounds’) suggests that bleeding has ceased or 
has been relatively modest. Melaena is the passage 
of black tarry stools, usually due to acute upper 
Gl bleeding (see ‘Haematemesis’ below), but 
occasionally due to bleeding within the small bowe 
or right side of the colon. Haematochezia is the 
passage of fresh red or maroon blood per rectum; 
it is usually due to colonic bleeding, but 15% of 
cases result from profuse upper Gl bleeding. 

Haematemesis 

With major upper Gl haemorrhage, resuscitation 
must take place alongside assessment. Diagnosis 
is secondary and will usually be established at 
upper Gl endoscopy (UGIE). Many units have 
a major haemorrhage protocol with which you 
should be familiar. 

Peptic ulcer 

Peptic ulcer is the most common cause of upper Gl 
bleeding (50%) and an important cause of massive 
haemorrhage. It is often accompanied by epigastric 
pain. Important aetiological factors include Helico¬ 
bacter pylori infection (95% of duodenal, 75% of 
gastric ulcers) and NSAIDs/aspirin. 

| Gastritis/duodenitis 

Gastritis/duodenitis (30%) is typically accompa¬ 
nied by dyspepsia, epigastric discomfort and 
nausea. Most commonly, it is due to excess 
alcohol consumption or NSAIDs/aspirin. 

Oesophagitis 

This is usually due to gastro-oesophageal reflux. 
There may be a history of heartburn, indigestion 
or painful swallowing. 


Mallory-Weiss tear 

This is a mucosal tear in the oesophago-gastric 
junction following increased gastric pressure. 
90% of these bleeds stop spontaneously. 
The history is characteristic: forceful retching 
with initially non-bloody vomit, followed by 
haematemesis. 

Oesophageal/gastric varices 

These are collateral veins that form in response 
to portal hypertension and allow portal blood 
to bypass the liver and enter the systemic 
circulation directly. The most common cause 
is hepatic cirrhosis Segmental varices from portal 
vein thrombosis (pancreatitis) may occasionally 
occur. Patients typically present with massive 
upper Gl bleeding. 

Upper Gl malignancy 

There is often a background of weight loss 
anorexia, early satiety or dysphagia; a palpable 
epigastric mass or signs of metastatic disease 
may rarely be evident. 

Other uncommon causes 

Congenital malformations of the vascular tree, 
e.g. Dieulafoy’s lesion, can produce major 
haemorrhage. An aorto-duodenal fistula will 
usually present with massive haematemesis - 
suspect this if patient has had previous surgery 
for abdominal aortic aneurysm. 


Rectal bleeding 

The majority of patients have a benign cause 
In acute rectal bleeding, assessment of bleed¬ 
ing severity and adequate resuscitation take 
precedence over diagnosis. The pattern of 
bleeding guides the location. Anorectal bleed¬ 
ing typically presents with intermittent episodes 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 














GASTROINTESTINAL HAEMORRHAGE: HAEMATEMESISAND RECTAL BLEEDING 


Differential diagnosis 


of minor, fresh bright red bleeding during or 
after defecation, which is not mixed with the 
stools Distal colon bleeding is darker red and 
may be partially mixed with the stools; proximal 
colon bleeding is dark red and fully mixed with 
stools. Remember that large volume upper Gl or 
proximal colon bleeding can present with fresh 
bright red bleeding (and shock). 

Perianal disorders 

These are a common cause of rectal bleeding 
in all age groups. Bright red bleeding is often 
associated with other anorectal symptoms such 
as discomfort, mucus discharge or pruritus. 
Causes include haemorrhoids, fissure-in-ano, 
perianal Crohn’s disease and anal cancer. Be 
aware that haemorrhoids can cause major 
bleeds. Always examine the anus of a patient 
presenting with rectal bleeding: diagnosis is made 
by PR examination and proctoscopy. Severe 
pain, especially during defecation, suggests 
anal fissure, and the patient will not tolerate 
PR examination. Always consider a concurrent 
proximal bleeding source. 

Diverticular disease 

Diverticular disease is the most common cause of 
severe acute rectal bleeding and typically occurs 
in older patients. Bleeding occurs due to erosion 
of a vessel in the neck of a diverticulum and is 
mostly fresh blood; it may be life-threatening 
but stops spontaneously in 75% of patients. 

| Colorectal carcinoma 

Colorectal carcinoma is a common cancer in men 
and women. Recent weight loss, tenesmus, a 
change or alternating bowel habit or symptoms 
of colicky lower abdominal pain may be present. 
However, the presentation is frequently insidious 
with minimal symptoms. Polyps may also cause 
rectal bleeding. Diagnosis is made by colonic 
imaging (sigmoidoscopy/colonoscopy or CT colo- 
nography in patients who are unfit for endoscopic 
investigation) 

Inflammatory bowel disease 

Colorectal inflammation in ulcerative colitis or 
Crohn’s disease may cause rectal bleeding. The 
passage of frank blood ± mucus and tenesmus 
may occur in proctitis. Colitis produces bloody 
diarrhoea with intermittent cramping lower 


abdominal pain and, often, systemic upset. 
Endoscopy and biopsy of the lower bowel 
confirm the diagnosis; inflammatory markers 
(CRP, faecal calprotectin) provide a useful guide 
to disease activity. Perianal Crohn’s disease is 
often associated with complex perianal fistulas. 

Ischaemic colitis 

Ischaemic colitis tends to occur in older patients, 
typically resulting in severe lower abdominal 
pain associated with rectal bleeding. It results 
from occlusion of the inferior mesenteric artery, 
which is usually due to situ thrombosis in ath¬ 
erosclerosis. (In contrast, acute embolus more 
commonly affects the superior mesenteric artery 
territory.) 


I Angiodysplasia (arteriovenous 
malformation) 


These are degenerative vascular malformations 
and are an important cause of severe lower Gl 
bleeding, predominantly in the elderly. Typical 
endoscopic features may be apparent but 
diagnosis is often challenging (CT angiography, 
labelled red cell scan) and bleeding frequently 
recurs. 


15 


Other causes 

Gl infections may cause bloody diarrhoea by 
causing local invasion of the mucosa, usually with 
systemic upset. Other small intestinal sources of 
rectal blood loss include Meckel’s diverticulum 
(melaena) and intussusception (‘currant jelly' 
bleeding) in young patients. Acute small bowel 
ischaemia may be associated with rectal bleeding 
but the predominant feature is severe abdominal 
pain and the patient is severely unwell. Small 
bowel tumours are rare and present with intermit¬ 
tent bleeding (may require capsule endoscopy). 

Radiation proctocolitis should be considered 
in any patient with a history of pelvic radiation, 
e.g. for prostatic or gynaecological malignancy; 
most present within 2 years of radiotherapy. 

Colonic ulcer is an uncommon cause of 
bleeding, usually related to use of NSAIDs 
Rectal ulcers are poorly understood, typcally 
occur in young adults and usually respond to 
conservative treatment (bulking agents and 
laxatives). Nicorandil is associated with oral, 
rectal and anal ulcers. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 











GASTROINTESTINAL HAEMORRHAGE: HAEMATEMESISAND RECTAL BLEEDING 


Haematemesis: overview 


ABCDE, urgent FBC, U+E, LFTs, coagulation screen, cross match 


Resuscitation requirements assessed? (Boxes 15.1 and 15.2) 


Yes 


Active bleeding, features of shock 

Yes 

or suspected variceal bleed? 


J No 

Yes 

Rockall risk score >0 (Table 15.1)? 


No 



Urgent UGIE 

after adequate ---► 

resuscitation 


Final diagnosis 


Consider 
inpatient UGIE 


Final diagnosis 


Full clinical assessment 


Background of alarm features? 

Yes 


No 



Haematemesis preceded by 

Yes 

forceful retching / vomiting? 


No 



Consider upper Gl malignancy-► UGIE 


Probable Mai ory-Weiss tear 


Consider gastritis / duodenitis / oesophagitis 
UGIE if diagnosis unclear or ongoing symptoms 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 




































GASTROINTESTINAL HAEMORRHAGE: HAEMATEMESISAND RECTAL BLEEDING 


Haematemesis: step-by-step assessment 


Box 15.1 Resuscitation in acute haemorrhage 


First steps 

• A+B before C: recheck airway frequently, especially if J-GCS/vomiting. Give high concentration 0 2 

• Get help: one pair of hands is not enough. If necessary call the medical emergency or cardiac arrest team 

Secure IV access and monitoring 

• 2 large bore cannulae in antecubital veins or equivalent 

• Central venous cannulation, e.g. femoral line if peripheral access difficult 

• Get expert help immediately if you cannot obtain adequate access 

• Urgent FBC, U+E, LFTs, coagulation screen and cross-match (inform blood bank) 

• Measure pulse, BP, RR, GCS and reassess peripheral perfusion every 10-15 min 

• Insert urinary catheter; monitor hourly urine output 

Resuscitate and reassess 

Early shock features (see Box 15.2) or any ongoing blood 
loss: 

• 0.5-1 L stat of IV crystalloid or colloid 

• 2 units of red cells if Hb <8 g/dL, ongoing bleeding or 
>2 LIV crystalloid or colloid given 

Reassess 

• If advanced shock features or major blood 
loss on reassessment, resuscitate as per the 
adjacent column. 

• Otherwise, continue with treatment and discuss with 
haematologist if any of the following: 

known coagulopathy/anticoagulant therapy 
INR >1.4 

platelets <100 x 10 9 /L 
fibrinogen <1 g/L 
>4 LIV fluid in any form 


Box 15 2 Clinical features of hypovolaemic shock 

Early 

Advanced 

• HR>100bpm 

• Systolic BP <100 mmHg (or J-40 mmFIg from baseline) 

• Capillary refill time (CRT) >2s 

• FIR >120 bpm 

• Narrow pulse pressure 

• RR >20 breaths/min 

• J-Postural BP 

• Cold, mottled peripheries 

• Pale, sweaty, anxious, thirsty 

• Confused, lethargic, J.GCS 


Advanced shock features (see Box 1 5.2) or ongoing major 

blood loss: 

• 1 -2 L stat of IV crystalloid 

• use red cells as soon as available 

• consider 0 negative blood if significant delay in 
cross-matching (use group specific blood as soon as 
possible) 

Reassess 

• If ongoing advanced shock features or major blood 
loss, activate the major haemorrhage protocol: 
administer red cell concentrate (RCC) and fresh 
frozen plasma (FFP) and consider platelets and 
cryoprecipitate. 

• Seek specialist input, e.g. ICU, Gl, surgical, as 
appropriate and discuss haemostatic support, with 
haematologist. 


Resuscitation requirements assessed? 

( and ) 

Resuscitation is the top priority. Use Box 15.1 as 
a framework for evaluating resuscitation needs but 
tailor your assessment to the individual. Monitoring 
trends of the parameters in Box 15.2 provides 
far more information than a single ‘snapshot’ 
assessment and is essential for evaluating 
response to treatment. Do not rely exclusively 
on this framework and you should be aware that 
patients may respond differently to haemorrhage: 
young patients may compensate until blood loss 


is profound. Remember that heart rate may be 
misleading in patients on rate-limiting medications, 
e.g. beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, or 
with fixed-rate pacemakers, and that compensa¬ 
tory vasoconstriction may not occur in patients on 
vasodilators. In patients who present with fresh, red 
haematemesis, the subsequent vomiting of ‘coffee 
grounds’ or passage of black tarry stools may 
simply be a manifestation of the original bleed, but 
further bright red haematemesis or haematochezia 
implies continued active bleeding. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


15 















GASTROINTESTINAL HAEMORRHAGE: HAEMATEMESISAND RECTAL BLEEDING 


Haematemesis: step-by-step assessment 


2 


Active bleeding, features of shock or 
suspected variceal bleed? 


All pat ents with haematemesis accompanied by 
features of shock (see Box 15.2) or evidence of 
ongoing bleeding should have an urgent UGIE 
after adequate resuscitation. Variceal bleeds have 
a high mortality (30-50%) and usually require 
urgent UGIE following resuscitation and correc¬ 
tion of coagulopathy. Assume variceal bleeding in 
any patient with known hepatic cirrhosis, clinical 
features of chronic liver disease (see Box 19.5, p. 
1 76) or deranged LFTs with evidence of impaired 
hepatic synthetic function (tPT, ialbumin). 


Rockall risk score >0 (Table 15.1)? 


In the absence of continued active bleeding, 
haem dynamic compromise or oesophageal 
varices, use a risk scoring system to guide the 
need for hospital admission and UGIE. The Rockall 
risk score comprises clinical (pre-endoscopic) 
and diagnostic (post-endoscopic) elements. A 
pre-endoscopic score of 0 predicts an extremely 
low risk of death (0.2%) and rebleeding (0.2%), 
but predicted mortality rises to 2.4% for a score 
of 1 and 5.6% for a score of 2. Admit patients 
with a pre-endoscopy Rockall score >0 for further 


assessment and observation; most need inpatient 
UGIE to calculate the full score and establish 
the diagnosis. 


4 


Background of alarm features? 


Request UGIE to exclude upper Gl malignancy 
if the patient has any of the following alarm 
features: 

• weight loss 

• anorexia or early satiety 

• dysphagia 

• epigastric mass 

• lymphadenopathy 

• jaundice 

• age >50 years. 


5 


Haematemesis preceded by forceful 
retching/vomiting? 


With a characteristic history of Mallory-Weiss 
tear, the diagnosis can often be made clinically, 
without the need for UGIE. In other cases, a 
diagnosis of gastritis and oesophagitis may be 
suggested by the history. Consider UGIE where 
there is no obvious explanation for symptoms 
or repeated haematemeses. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 












GASTROINTESTINAL HAEMORRHAGE: HAEMATEMESISAND RECTAL BLEEDING 


Haematemesis: step by-step assessment 


Table 151 Rockall risk score 


Score 





Variable 

0 

1 

2 

3 


Age 

<60 years 

60-79 years 

>80 years 


Pre endoscopy: 

Shock 

‘No shock’, systolic 
BP >100 mmHg, 
pulse <100 bpm 

’Tachycardia’, 
systolic BP 
>100 mmHg, 
pulse >100 bpm 

‘Hypotension’, 
systolic BP 
<100 mmHg 


Initial score 
criteria 

Comorbidity 

No major 
comorbidity 


Cardiac failure, 
ischaemic heart 
disease, any 
major comorbidity 

Renal failure, 
liver failure, 
disseminated 
malignancy 


Diagnosis 

Mallory—Weiss 
tear, no lesion 
identified and no 
stigmata of recent 
haemorrhage 

All other 
diagnoses 

Upper Gl tract 
cance 


Post-endoscopy: 
Additional criteria 
for full score 

Major stigmata 
of recent 
haemorrhage 

None, or dark spot 
only 


Blood in upper Gl 
tract, adherent 
clot, visible or 
spurting vessel 




downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 














GASTROINTESTINAL HAEMORRHAGE: HAEMATEMESISAND RECTAL BLEEDING 


Rectal bleeding: overview 

1 Acute rectal bleed? 



Risk factors for major 

Yes 

Colonic 

Cancer / polyp / arteriovenous 

colorectal pathology? 


imaging 

diverticular disease 


No 4 - 


6 


Clinical features of anal disorder? 


Yes 




Likely haemorrhoids or anal fissure 


No 


Refer Gl if persistent or troublesome symptoms 


1 Acute rectal bleed? 

Regard any prolonged, profuse or ongoing 
episode of bright red/maroon PR blood loss 
within the previous 24 hours as acute rectal 
bleeding. Assess patients with melaena in the 
same way as those with haematemesis (see 
above). Where the predominant problem is 
bloody diarrhoea, evaluate as described on page 
93. In the absence of acute bleeding, proceed 
to step 5. 


2 


Resuscitation requirements assessed? 
(see and ) 


Make adequate resuscitation your top priority 
Evaluate and address resuscitation requirements 
as described for haematemesis, step 1. 


Suspected upper Gl source? 


Assume, initially, that melaena reflects upper 
Gl bleeding and assess as described for 
haematemesis. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















































GASTROINTESTINAL HAEMORRHAGE: HAEMATEMESISAND RECTAL BLEEDING 


Rectal bleeding: step-by-step assessment 


Brisk bleeding from the upper Gl tract may 
present with a fresh red PR bleed and implies 
severe, life-threatening haemorrhage. The diag¬ 
nosis is straightforward if there is concomitant 
haematemesis but otherwise a high index of 
suspicion is essential. Proceed with a working 
diagnosis of lower Gl bleeding in patients without 
haemodynamic instability but suspect an upper 
Gl source in those with features of hypovolaemic 
shock. If present, seek senior Gl input and 
consider UGIE as the first-line investigation 
following resuscitation especially if there are 
any recent upper Gl symptoms, e.g. epigastric 
pain, or known/suspected oesophageal varices. 


4 


High-risk bleed ( 3ox 15.3)? 


Consider non-admission or early discharge 
(with outpatient follow-up) if the patient has no 
high-risk features (see Box 1 5.2) or evidence of 
ongoing bleeding - especially if there is evidence 
of a benign anal disorder. Do not discharge a 
patient without making a clear decision as to the 
likely cause of bleeding. Admit any patient with 
risk factors for uncontrolled or recurrent bleeding 
(see Box 15.3). Once adequately resuscitated 
and clinically stable, arrange colonic imaging 
to establish the site and cause of bleeding. 
The majority of rectal bleeding settles with 
conservative management. Colonoscopy is most 
informative when the bleeding has stopped. CT 
angiography requires active ongoing bleeding of 
a sufficient rate to be detected. 

Seek urgent senior surgical input in any 
patient with continued active bleeding, ongoing 


haemodynamic instability despite resuscitation 
or high transfusion requirements. 


5 


Risk factors for major 
colorectal pathology? 


Refer the patient for urgent lower Gl investiga¬ 
tion (usually colonoscopy) to exclude colorectal 
cancer if any of the criteria in Box 15.4 is present. 

Also consider lower Gl endoscopic assessment 
if the patient has: 

• systemic/extraintestinal features of 
inflammato y bowel disease (see Box 9.3, 
P-91) 

• a history of pelvic radiotherapy 

• recent-onset, persistent bleeding when 
the patient is >50 years or has a strong 
family history of colorectal cancer, e.g. a 
first-degree relative <45 years at diagnosis, 
or two or more first-degree relatives. 


6 


Clinical features of anal disorder? 


Perform careful rectal examination and proctos¬ 
copy in all patients to look for an anal disorder. 
Do not forget to look for anal cancer. If a benign 
anorectal pathology one is identified, provide 
reassurance but refer the patient for outpatient 
colorectal evaluation if there is diagnostic doubt 
or symptoms persist despite conservative 
management. 

Arrange further Gl investigation and/or referral 
in all patients without an obvious anorectal cause, 
in whom bleeding persists or recurs. 


Box 15.3 Risk factors for adverse outcomes in 
acute lower Gl bleeding 


• Any haemodynamic instability 

• Initial haematocrit <35% or need for red blood cell 
transfusion 

• Any visualized red blood PR 

• INR >1.4 or current anticoagulant use (warfarin, 
novel oral anticoagulants, aspirin/NSAID) 

• Significant comorbidity, e.g. cardiorespiratory, renal, 
hepatic impairment or current hospital inpatient 

• Age >60 years 


Box 15.4 High-risk features for colorectal 
cancer in patients with rectal bleeding 


• Rectal bleeding >4 weeks with change of bowel habit 
(I or Tfrequency or alternating bowel habit) 

• Tenesmus 

• Palpable rectal or abdominal mass 

• Significant we ght loss, e.g. >6 kg 

• Previous excision of colorectal cancer or polyps 

• History of inflammatory bowel disease 

• Family history of colorectal cancer, polyps or 
inherited colorectal cancer syndromes 

• Age >50 years without anal symptoms, e.g. 
discomfort, itching, lumps, prolapse 


15 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



















16 


Haematuria 


Haematuria, or blood in the urine, may be visible 
(macroscopic) or non-visible (microscopic), 
detected only by dipstick testing or urine 
microscopy. Visible haematuria strongly suggests 
significant urological disease and always requires 
further evaluation. Non-visible haematuria (defined 
in the UK as >1 + haematuria on 2 out of 3 urine 
dipstick tests) is a common incidental finding in 
asymptomatic patients and the challenge lies 
in differentiating benign causes from serious 
pathology. 

It is important to differentiate haematuria from: 

• contamination in menstruating women 

• other causes of urine discolouration 
(Box 16.1). 


Tumours 

60% of renal cancers and 80% of bladder 
cancers present with haematuria. Both tumour 
types are rare below the age of 40. Associated 
features may include loin pain, abdominal mass 
and systemic upset (renal cancer) or lower urinary 
tract symptoms (LUTS), e.g. dysuria, frequency, 
urgency and hesitancy (bladder cancer). 
However, in the majority of cases, haematuria 
is the sole symptom and examination is normal. 
Risk factors are listed in Box 16.2. Around 12% 
of prostate cancers present with haematuria 
(more commonly microscopic). 


Stones 

Stones may cause obstruction anywhere along 
the urinary tract, though typically at sites of nar¬ 
rowing, e.g. the pelvi-ureteric junction, pelvic 
brim and vesico-ureteric junction. Those in 
the renal pelvis or bladder may remain asymp- 
tomat c for years and present incidentally with 
dipstick haematuria. Stones may be formed from 
calcium oxalate (80%, associated with hypercal- 
ciuria), from calcium phosphate (10% linked to 
renal tubular acidosis and hyperparathyroidism), 


or other stone types (10%) comprising urate 
(excessive meat consumption or chemotherapy) 
and struvite (staghorn calculi, associated with 
chronic urinary tract infection) and cysteine (rare 
inherited disorders). Ureteric obstruction typically 
presents with renal ‘colic’ - acute, severe loin 
pain radiating to the groin ± genitalia that builds to 
a crescendo of intensity over a few minutes, often 
accompanied by restlessness (a key difference 
to peritonism where patients lie still) nausea 
and vomiting. The pain persists until obstruction 
is relieved. Visible haematuria may occur and 
dipstick is positive in 90% of cases. 


Bacterial urinary tract infection 

Women who are sexually active, pregnant, or are 
postmenopausal are prone to UTIs. UTIs in men 
<50 years old are uncommon. Sexually transmit¬ 
ted infections should be specifically investigated 
in this cohort. Common clinical features of lower 
UTI include frequency, dysuria, urgency, malodor¬ 
ous urine and visible or dipstick haematuria In 
acute pyelonephritis (with ascending infection 
to the renal tract) there is typically loin pain, 
fever, rigors and significant systemic upset. UTI 
is likely if a dipstick test is positive for either 
nitrite or leucocyte esterase, but is unlikely if both 
are absent. A pure growth of >10 5 organisms/ 
mL of fresh MSU confirms the diagnosis and 
permits sensitivity testing. A subset of patients 
(particularly women) develop recurrent UTIs. It is 
important to rule out renal tract stones (sources 
of chronic infection), incomplete bladder emptying 
(e.g. prostatic hypertrophy in men) and diabetes. 
Rarely, a renal tract malignancy may present 
with recurrent UTIs due to necrotic tissue with 
secondary infection. 


Atypical infection 

Urinary tuberculosis (TB) may cause visible 
haematuria ± other urinary tract symptoms, 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










HAEMATURIA 


Differential diagnosis 


159 


Box 16.1 Causes of urine discolouration other 
than haematuria 


Orange 

• Concentrated normal urine, e.g. dehydration 

• Conjugated bilirubin 

• Rifampicin, isoniazid (also in tears/saliva/sweat), 
Senna 

• Rhubarb, carrots 

• Any cause of red urine 

Red 

• Myoglobinuria (rhabdomyolysis) 

• Porphyrins 

• Beetroot, blackberries 

• Chlorpromazine metronidazole, nitrofurantoin, 
warfarin 

• Mercury and lead poisoning (rare) 

Brown 

• Conjugated bilirubin 

• Muddy brown’ urine - red cell casts in acute tubular 
necrosis (ATN) 

• Homogentisic acid (in alkaptonuria or ochronosis) 

Black (rare) 

• Drugs: L-dopa 

• Phenol and copper poisoning 

Blue/Green 

• Drugs/dyes, e.g. propofol, fluorescein, methylene blue 

• Pseudomonal urine nfection 


pulmonary manifestations and constitutional 
upset Urinalysis is positive for WBC but routine 
culture is negative. Diagnosis requires a fresh 
early morning urine sample for acid-/alcohol-fast 
bacilli and TB culture. Painless visible haematuria 
toward the end of voiding is the most common 
initial presenting feature of Schistosoma haema¬ 
tobium infection, most commonly acquired in 
Egypt/East Africa, e.g. by swimming in freshwater 
lakes. Clues to diagnosis include travel history 
and eosinophilia. Non-visible haematuria is also 
common in bacterial endocarditis. 

Renal disease 

Haematuria may occur as a result of disorders 
that disrupt the glomerular basement membrane 


Box 16.2 Risk factors for urinary tract cancer 


• Smoking 

• Occupational exposure to chemicals/dyes (benzenes, 
aromatic amines) 

• Irritative voiding symptoms 

• Previous pelvic irradiation 

• Cyclophosphamide exposure 

• Schistosomiasis - increases risk of bladder 
squamous cell carcinoma (rather than transitional 
cell carcinoma) 

• Chronic inflammation of other causes 


(glomerulonephritis). Associated features include 
proteinuria, hypertension, oedema and renal 
failure. Those most likely to result in haematuria 
include anti-glomerular basement membrane 
disease (Goodpasture’s syndrome), small-vessel 
vasculitis, e.g. Wegener’s granulomatosis, post¬ 
streptococcal glomerulonephritis, SLE and 
immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy. In IgA 
nephropathy there may be intermittent episodes 
of visible haematuria coinciding with upper res¬ 
piratory tract infections. Diagnosis of glomerular 
disease is made by renal biopsy. Inherited renal 
disorders, such as Alport's syndrome and adult 
polycystic kidney disease, may also present with 
visible or non-visible haematuria. 


16 


Other causes 

• Trauma: direct urethral trauma; blunt or 
penetrating abdominal/pelvic injury. 

• Iatrogenic: renal biopsy, transurethral 
resection of prostate, cystoscopy, urinary 
catheterisation. 

• Vascular: arterio-venous malformations; 
renal vein thrombosis. 

• Coagulopathy. 

• Renal cysts 

• Acute tubular necrosis. 

• Thin basement membrane disease 
(common, benign, often familial). 

• Loin pain-haematuria syndrome. 

• Extreme exertion, e.g. distance running. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


















HAEMATURIA 


160 “ . 

Overview 


Full clinical assessment, urinalysis, U+E 


1 


Visible, symptomatic or 
persistent haematuria? 


No 




Transient or spurious haematuria 


Yes 



Thin basement membrane disease / arteriovenous malformation / stone / cyst 
Monitor regularly for new or recurrent visible haematuria / lower urinary tract symptoms / 
proteinuria / 1GFR 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 









































HAEMATURIA 


161 


Step-by-step assessment 


Visible, symptomatic or 
persistent haematuria? 

Consider other causes of urine discoloration (see 
Box 16.1) that may mimic visible haematuria. Use 
dipstick testing (at least 1 +) on a freshly voided 
sample to detect non-visible haematuria; send 
urine for microscopy only in uncertain cases, e.g. 
suspicion of myoglobinuria. Ask specifically about 
episodes of visible haematuria in any patient with 
a positive dipstick test. Repeat dipstick testing 
at a later date if the test was performed during 
menstruation, shortly after strenuous exercise 
or following urinary catheterization. 

Evaluate further for haematuria as described 
below if the patient has: 

• visible haematuria 

• non-visible haematuria with loin pain or 
LUTS 

• 2 out of 3 positive dipstick tests for 
haematuria at different times. 


2 


Renal colic? 


The combination of haematuria and renal colic 
(see above) suggests ureteric obstruction, usually 
from a stone or, less commonly, from clots or 
sloughed renal papilla. Confirm the presence and 
position of a stone with a CT of the kidneys, 
ureters and bladder (CT KUB). Dipstick the urine 
for infection (nitrites and leucocytes). Observe 
closely for decreased urine output and symp¬ 
toms of infection. Perform further investigations 
to establish an underlying cause, e.g. chemical 
composition of stone; plasma calcium/phosphate/ 
uric acid. Refer to Urology for further management. 


3 


Evidence of UTI or recent instrumentation 
of urinary tract 


Refer to Urology if visible haematuria follows 
surgical or invasive procedures of the renal tract, 
e.g. renal biopsy, ureteroscopy, transurethral 
resection of prostate, or abdominal/pelvic/ 
genital trauma. 

The absence of leucocytes and nitrites on 
dipstick effectively excludes UTI in most cases. 
If dipstick testing is positive or there is strong 
clinical suspicion, send a midstream urine sample 
for culture; treat confirmed infection then recheck 
for non-visible haematuria. 


Consider infective endocarditis if there is fever, 
splinter haemorrhages, predisposing lesion or 
new murmur. 

Do not attribute haematuria to anticoagulation 
or antiplatelet treatment alone without further 
investigation. 


Visible haematuria, LUTS age >40 or 
high-risk features? 

In the absence of renal colic and following 
treatment/exclusion of transient causes of 
haematuria, you must exclude cancer if any of 
the following features is present: 

• visible haematuria 

• LUTS 

• age >40 years 

• high-risk features for urinary tract cancer 
(see Box 16.2). 

Refer such patients to Urology for further 
investigation, e.g. renal USS ± IVU or CT urogram 
and cystoscopy. 


iGFR, proteinuria, tBP or clinical 
suspicion of renal disorder? 

Refer to a nephrologist for further evaluation ± 
renal biopsy if any of the following features is 
present: 

• proteinuria, e.g. albumin : creatinine ratio 
>30 

• renal impairment (GFR <60 mUmin) 

• TBP in a patient <40 years 

• connective tissue disease, e.g. SLE 

• family history of Alport’s syndrome/adult 
polycystic kidney disease 

• episodes of visible haematuria coinciding 
with upper urinary tract infections. 


Likely benign cause. Monitor periodically. 


Isolated microscopic haematuria is common and 
usually due to benign disease, e.g. thin basement 
membrane disease. Provided that the above 
causes have been excluded, reassure patients 
that further investigation is not necessary but 
continue to monitor (e.g. annually) for features 
such as new urinary tract symptoms, visible 
haematuria, proteinuria or renal impairment. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


16 


















Haemoptysis 


Haemoptysis, coughing up blood, requires 
thorough evaluation to exclude serious pathol¬ 
ogy such as lung cancer, tuberculosis (TB) and 
pulmonary embolism (PE); many patients will 
require detailed imaging and specialist assess¬ 
ment. Massive haemoptysis (>500 mL/24 hours) 
may be life-threatening. 

Respiratory tract infections 

Respiratory tract infections (RTIs) are the most 
common cause of haemoptysis. They typically 
cause blood-stained purulent sputum rather than 
frank blood, and have associated features such 
as cough, fever and dyspnoea. In acute bronchi¬ 
tis, mucosal inflammation can rupture superficial 
blood vessels; patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease may have haemoptysis during 
an infective exacerbation. Pneumonia may cause 
frank haemoptysis, especially with invasive 
bacteria, e.g. Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella 
spp. or fungi; patients are usually profoundly 
unwell. Mycetoma, lung abscess and TB may 
cause massive haemoptysis. More commonly, TB 
produces chronic cough with small haemoptyses 
fever, night sweats, weight loss and characteristic 
CXR changes. 

Lung tumours 

Haemoptysis is common in primary bronchial 
tumours but rare in secondary lung tumours. Risk 
factors are smoking (especially >40 pack-years) 
and age >40 years; repeated small haemoptyses 


or blood-streaked sputum for >2 weeks strongly 
suggests malignancy. Massive haemoptysis may 
occur with erosion of tumour into a large vessel. 
Weight loss, recent-onset cough, finger clubbing 
and lymphadenopathy are well-recognized fea¬ 
tures CXR may show a variety of abnormalities 
(Box 17.1) but is sometimes normal. 

Pulmonary embolism 

Frank haemoptysis occurs due to pulmonary 
infarction, usually accompanied by sudden-onset 
dyspnoea and pleuritic pain. A pleural rub or 
signs of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) are present 
in a minority of cases. CXR may show a wedge- 
shaped peripheral opacity or pleural effusion, 
but is most often normal. 


Bronchiectasis 

There is typically a background of chronic cough 
with copious foul-smelling purulent sputum. 
Finger clubbing and coarse inspiratory crackles 
may be evident on examination. 

Other causes 

Pulmonary oedema may cause pink, frothy 
sputum but dyspnoea is almost always the domi¬ 
nant complaint. Other causes include pulmonary 
hypertension (especially associated with mitral 
stenosis), coagulopathies, foreign body inhalation, 
chest trauma, Wegener’s granulomatosis and 
Goodpasture's syndrome. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













HAEMOPTYSIS 


Differential diagnosis 


163 


Box 17.1 The CXR in lung cancer 


Common abnormalities on CXR in patients with lung cancer 
include: 

• a discrete mass (see Fig. 17.1) or cavitating lesion (see 
Fig. 17.2) 

• collapse of a lobe secondary to tumour obstruction (see 
Figs 17.3 and 17.4) 

• unilateral hilar enlargement or pleural effusion (see Fig. 
12.6, p. 119) 



Fig. 17.1 A solitary lung mass (From Douglas G, Nicol 
F, Robertson C. Macleod’s Clinical Examination, 12th edn. 
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2009.) 



Fig. 17.3 Left lower lobe collapse. The changes in left 
lower lobe collapse may be subtle and easily overlooked; 
note the triangular opacification behind the heart, giving 
the appearance of an unusually straight left heart border 
(From Boon NA, Colledge NR, Walker BR. Davidson’s 
Principles & Practice of Medicine, 20th edn. Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone, 2006.) 


• consolidation (see Figs 12.3 and 1 2.4, p. 118) that 
fails to resolve or recurs in the same lobe. 

In a substantial proportion of cases, the CXR is normal. 




Fig 17.4 Right upper lobe collapse. Note the right 
upper zone opacification, loss of volume in the right lung 
field and tracheal deviation. (From Corne J, Pointon K 
Chest X-ray Made Easy, 3rd edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, 2010.) 


17 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













HAEMOPTYSIS 


164 “ 

Overview 


ABCDE 



Full clinical assessment, CXR, FBC, coagulation screen 



6 


Consider other causes 

CT ± specialist respiratory input if: 

1 haemoptysis persistent or recurrent 

2 age > 40 years or smoker 
3. CXR abnormal 


1 True haemoptysis? 

A clear history of blood being coughed up or 
mixed with sputum reliably indicates haemoptysis. 

Blood that suddenly appears in the mouth 
without coughing suggests a nasopharyngeal 
origin; ask about nosebleeds and look for 
epistaxis or a bleeding source within the mouth. 

Blood originating from the Gl tract is typically 
dark, acidic (test pH) and may contain food 
particles; blood that is frothy, alkaline and bright 
red or pink suggests a respiratory source. 


2 Massive haemoptysis? 

Bleeding is difficult to quantify clinically but 
estimate the volume and rate of blood loss, 
e.g. by direct observation, with a graduated 
container. The major risk is asphyxiation through 
flooding of alveoli or airway obstruction. Use 
the ABCDE approach (Chapter 2) and seek 
immediate anaesthetic help if any of the following 
is present: 

• large blood volume, e.g. >50 mL 
in 1 hour 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 














































HAEMOPTYSIS 


165 


Step-by-step assessment 


• airway compromise 

• haemodynamic instability. 


if smoker >40 years) for further assessment ± 
bronchoscopy even if CT is normal. 




Consider other causes/ 

Typical features of RTI? 


6 

further investigation 


Haemoptysis for <1 week with purulent sputum 
and/or fever suggests acute RTI; assess as 
described on page 123 and arrange follow-up 
review after treatment to ensure that haemoptysis 
has resolved. Also arrange a follow-up CXR 
within 6 weeks for any patient with radiographic 
consolidation to ensure resolution. 


4 


Clinical suspicion of 
pulmonary embolism? 


Perform a coagulation screen in any patient on 
anticoagulant therapy, with a history of bleeding 
disorder or with evidence of bleeding elsewhere, 
or if there is no clear alternative cause. 

Chronic cough with daily mucopurulent sputum 
production or persistent coarse inspiratory 
crackles suggests bronchiectasis - confirm 
the diagnosis with high-resolution thoracic CT. 

Consider TB if any of the following features 
is present: 


PE is easily forgotten and easily missed. Physical 
and CXR findings are unreliable so maintain a 
high index of suspicion. Consider PE and assess 
as shown in Fig. 12.7 (p. 120) if haemoptysis is 
acute and accompanied by any of the following: 

• rapid-onset pleuritic pain or dyspnoea 

• symptoms or signs of DVT 

• specific risk factors, e.g. active malignancy, 
recent surgery 

• new-onset frank haemoptysis with no 
other obvious cause (e.g. no typical 
features of RTI). 


5 


Lung cancer risk features? 


You must exclude lung cancer, even if another 
diagnosis appears more likely, in any patient with 
persistent haemoptysis (>2 weeks) and: 

• history of cigarette smoking 

• weight loss, finger clubbing, Horner’s 
syndrome, cervical lymphadenopathy 

• mass, cavitating lesion, persistent 
consolidation/collapse or unilateral hilar 
adenopathy/pleural effusion on CXR 
(see Box 17.1). 

Thoracic CT is a useful first-line investigation 
and may reveal a tumour or other cause for 
haemoptysis, e g. bronchiectasis; but refer 
the patient to a respiratory specialist (urgently 


• prior residence in an endemic area 

• immunosuppression (HIV, malnutrition, 
general debility) 

• suggestive clinical features, e.g. night 
sweats, fever, weight loss 

• suggestive CXR findings, e.g. a cavitating 
lesion (see Fig. 17.2), persistent 
consolidation, miliary TB. 

If suspected, obtain >3 sputum samples for 
acid-fast bacilli and mycobacterial culture, and 
seek expert respiratory input. 

Exclude Goodpasture’s syndrome and 
Wegener’s granulomatosis if there is evidence 
of renal involvement, e.g. haematuria, proteinuria, 
■J-GFR: check for anti-glomerular basement 
membrane and anti-PR3 (c-ANCA) antibodies 
and seek renal input. 

Arrange an ECG if the patient has: 

• a history of rheumatic fever 

• exertional dyspnoea, orthopnoea, 
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea 

• signs of mitral stenosis, e g. loud SI, 
low-pitched mid-diastolic murmur 

• signs of pulmonary hypertension, e.g. loud 
P2, right ventricular heave. 

If the cause is still unclear, consider CT and 
specialist respiratory input - especially if >40 
years, smoking history, ongoing symptoms or 
any CXR abnormality. 


17 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















Headache 



Headache is extremely common and usually 
benign. The challenge is to identify the small 
minority of patients with serious underlying 
pathology and those with disorders that respond 
to specific treatments. 

Subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH) 

The headache is typically of sudden onset 
(reaches maximal intensity within a few seconds), 
occipital and very severe. Distress and photo¬ 
phobia are common but neck stiffness may 
take hours to develop. Large bleeds may be 
complicated by -iGCS, seizure or focal neurologi¬ 
cal signs. Most cases are evident on CT but LP 
is required in suspected cases with normal CT. 

Benign thunderclap headache mimics the 
headache of SAH but investigation reveals no 
evidence of an intracranial vascular disorder. It 
may be associated with coitus or exercise. 

Other vascular causes 

Intracerebellar haemorrhage: typically presents 
with acute-onset headache, nausea, vomiting, 
dizziness and ataxia ± IGCS. 

Spontaneous intracerebral or intraventricular 
haemorrhage: the onset of headache is usually 
over minutes to hours accompanied by a focal 
neurological deficit ± TGCS. 

Chronic subdural haematoma: may present 
insidiously with headache +/- confusion and/ 
or balance problems The headache may be 
exacerbated by straining, bending or exercise. 
At least one quarter of patients have no clear 
history of head trauma so have a high index of 
suspicion particularly in older patients or those 
taking anticoagulants. 

Cerebral venous thrombosis: headache is 
common but variable, e.g. ‘thunderclap’, throb 
bing, ‘band-like’, as are associated features, e g. 
nausea, vomiting, seizures, cranial nerve palsies, 
hemiparesis, ataxia and J-GCS. 


Vertebrobasilar dissection: may cause acute- 
onset occipital/posterior neck pain with brainstem 
signs and symptoms. 

Meningitis 

Classically presents with headache, fever and 
meningism. The onset of headache is typically 
over hours rather than sudden. Viral meningitis 
is usually self-limiting, with headache the most 
prominent clinical feature. Bacterial meningitis 
is life-threatening; presenting features include 
IGCS, signs of shock (see Box 30.1 , p. 267), 
purpuric rash (see Fig. 27.13, p. 244) and focal 
neurological signs. LP (see Clinical tool, p. 170) 
is helpful in the diagnosis but must not delay IV 
antibiotics therapy. Beware atypical presentations 
in immunocompromised, pregnant or alcoholic 
patients. 

Migraine 

Recurrent severe headaches lasting several hours 
to a few days, usually accompanied by photo¬ 
phobia, phonophobia and nausea ± vomiting. In 
one-third there are associated focal neurological 
features - an ‘aura’ (Box 18.1). The headache 
is typically intense, throbbing and unilateral. The 
patient usually prefers to lie in a quiet, darkened 
room. Triggers include cheese, chocolate, alcohol 
and oral contraceptives. A first attack aged >40 
years is uncommon. 

Cluster headache 

This refers to severe, unilateral, retro-orbital 
headache with restlessness, agitation and 
ipsilateral lacrimation, conjunctival injection 
and rhinorrhoea. Attacks are short-lived (15-90 
minutes) but occur frequently and repeatedly 
(often at the same time each day) in ‘clusters’ 
lasting days to weeks; these are separated by 
months without symptoms. The male to female 
ratio is 5:1. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 












HEADACHE 


Differential diagnosis 


167 


Box 18.1 What constitutes a migraine aura? 


Auras are focal neurological phenomena that precede 
or accompany a migrainous headache. They occur 
in 20-30% of patients, usually developing gradually 
over 5-20 minutes and lasting <60 minutes. Most are 
visual but they may also be sensory or motor. Common 
examples include: 

• 'fortification spectra’: shimmering zigzag lines that 
move across the visual field 

• flashing lights or spots 

• temporary loss of vision 

• numbness/dysaesthesia on one side of the body 

• expressive dysphasia. 


Temporal arteritis (giant cell arteritis) 

A large vessel vasculitis, closely associated with 
polymyalgia rheumatica, more common in women 
and unusual in patients <50 years. Clinical 
features include localized headache (temporal/ 
occipital), scalp tenderness, jaw claudication, 
visual loss, constitutional upset (malaise, night 
sweats, pyrexia, weight loss), and an abnormal 
temporal artery (inflamed, tender, non-pulsatile). 
ESR/CRP are almost always raised. The potential 
for rapid-onset irreversible visual loss necessitates 
urgent treatment with steroids. Temporal artery 
biopsy may confirm the diagnosis but should 
not delay steroid treatment. 

Acute glaucoma 

Acute glaucoma, an ophthalmological emergency, 
occurs due to a sudden increase in intraocula 
pressure. The typical patient is long-sighted, 
middle-aged or elderly, and presents with peri¬ 
orbital pain (± frontal headache), nausea and 
vomiting, blurred vision with halos around lights 
and conjunctival injection. Urgent ophthalmology 
referral is mandatory. 

Raised intracranial pressure 

May occur as a primary disorder (idiopathic 
intracranial hypertension) especially in overweight 


young women taking the oral contraceptive pill, 
or secondary to an intracranial space-occupying 
lesion. In the latter case, there may be focal 
neurological signs, change in personality or new- 
onset seizures. Headache tends to be worse 
in the morning and on lying flat, coughing or 
straining. There may be associated vomiting, 
often without nausea +/- papilloedema. 

Sinusitis 

This causes a dull, throbbing headache associ¬ 
ated with facial pain over the sinuses. It tends 
to be worse on bending forward. There are 
invariably associated nasal symptoms, e.g. 
congestion or discharge. Sinusitis lasting >8 
weeks requires CT to confirm the diagnosis. 

Medication overuse headache 

A common cause of chronic frequent head¬ 
ache (often daily) caused by excessive use of 
analgesics, ergotamines ortriptans. Treatment of 
choice is withdrawal of the overused medication. 


Tension headache 

The headache is usually bilateral (often general¬ 
ized or frontal) and described as ‘dull’, ‘tight’ or 
‘pressing’ in nature Unlike migraine, nausea and 
photophobia are uncommon and the patient can 
often continue with normal activities. 


18 


Other causes 

• Carbon monoxide poisoning. 

• Hypercapnia. 

• Drugs: vasodilators, e.g. nitrates, 
‘recreational’ drugs, e.g. solvents 

• Trigeminal neuralgia (brief, repetitive 
episodes of intense shooting/stabbing/ 
‘electric shock’-like pain in II and III divisions 
of trigeminal nerve). 

• Trauma: extradural haemorrhage, subdural 
haemorrhage, concussion. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 























HEADACHE 


168 “ — 

Overview 


ABCDE, CNS and eye examination 


1 


2 


3 


4 


6 


7 


8 


9 


First or worst’ presentation? 



downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 












































































HEADACHE 


Step-by-step assessment 


169 


1 ‘First or worst’ presentation? 


Acute severe pathology is less likely in patients 
with recurrence of a longstanding problem than 
in patients with a first presentation of headache. 
However, patients with a pre-existing headache 
disorder, e.g. migraine, may also present acutely 
with another diagnosis such as SAH. If a patient 
with chronic headaches presents with a new 
headache that is markedly different in severity 
or character to normal, assess it as new-onset 
headache. 


2 


Any features of meningitis? 


Identifying patients with bacterial meningitis is the 
top priority to allow rapid, potentially life-saving, 
antibiotic treatment. Patients may lack classical 
features but, in almost all cases, there will be 
at least one of: 

• fever (>38° C) 

• rash (not always petechial) 

• signs of shock (see Box 30.1 , p. 267) 

• acute-onset headache, e.g. over hours with 
meningism (Box 18.2). 


SAH may also present with severe headache 
and meningism, but is less likely if the headache 
onset was not sudden (see below). 

If you suspect meningitis, take blood cultures 
and throat swabs and give IV antibiotics imme¬ 
diately. If there are no contraindications, perform 
LP for CSF analysis (see Clinical tool). If you 
suspect raised intracranial pressure, perform CT 
prior to LP. It is difficult to distinguish viral from 
early bacterial meningitis clinically, so manage 
as bacterial meningitis pending CSF analysis. 


Suspect acute intracranial pathology? 


Arrange immediate neuroimaging to exclude 
life-threatening intracranial pathology, e.g. 
haemorrhage or space-occupying lesion wi h 
mass effect, if any of the following is present: 

• J-GCS 

• focal neurological signs 

• new-onset seizures 

• history of recent head injury 

• anticoagulation or coagulopathy. 


Box 18.2 Meningism? 


indicate neck stiffness. To test for Kernig’s sign, flex one of 


Meningism (neck stiffness, photophobia, positive Kernig’s 
sign) denotes irritation of the meninges. To test for neck 
stiffness, lie the patient supine with no pillow, place your 
fingers behind their head and gently attempt to flex the 
head until the chin touches the chest (Fig. 18.1 A); firm 
resistance to passive flexion and rigidity in the neck muscles 



Fig. 18.1 Testing for meningeal irritation. 


the patient’s legs at the hip and knee with your left hand 
placed over the medial hamstrings. Extend the knee with 
your right hand maintaining the hip in flexion (Fig. 18.1B). 
Resistance to extension by spasm in the hamstrings ± 
flexion of the other leg indicates a positive test. 



downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 




















HEADACHE 


Step-by-step assessment 


Clinical tool 

LP and CSF interpretation 


Contraindications to LP 

• Infected skin over the needle entry site. 

• Radiological evidence of raised intracranial pressure 

• Clinical suspicion of raised intracranial pressure: 
IGCS, focal neurological signs, papilloedema new 
seizures. 

• Coagulopathy or platelets <50 x 1 0 9 /L. 

• Severe agitation and restlessness. 

CSF interpretation 

Routine interpretation of CSF results includes (Table 18.1): 

• opening pressure (supine position) 

• protein 

• glucose (always compare with blood glucose) 

• cell count 

Additional tests, e.g. culture, PCR, oligoclonal bands, may 
be required in some circumstances. 

Additional points to consider 

• Early bacterial meningitis may be mistaken for viral 
meningitis as there is a predominance of lymphocytes 


in the CSF. If there is any possibility of bacterial 
meningitis, treat the patient with antibiotics pending 
further investigation, e.g. blood/CSF culture 

• If there is a Tlymphocyte count, send CSF for viral 
PCR, including herpes and enterovirus 

• Symptoms and signs in tuberculous meningitis are 
often mild or obscure - consider it if the patient has 
immunocompromise or is from an endemic TB region, 
especially if the CSF results suggest the diagnosis (see 
above). If suspected, send CSF for acid-fast bacilli and 
mycobacterial PCR and culture. 

• Non-infective disorders can produce a lymphocytic 
picture, including lupus, sarcoidosis and malignant 
mening tis. Check autoantibodies and discuss with 
Rheumatology if there are any other suggestive 
features. 

• A difficult procedure may result in a ‘traumatic tap', i.e 
red cells in the CSF. This can complicate interpretaton 
of the WBC. A rule of thumb is that 1 white cell 

per 1000 red cells is normal. However, if the CSF 
picture is unclear, then the clinical history must be 
taken into account. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 









Interpretation of CSF results 


HEADACHE 


171 


Step by-step assessment 


=5, 


2> 2? 


CD 

O > 

O .= £ 

A o §> 


CD 


T ^ S' 

co 75 ^ 

55 I 


0^0 
"=3 'E cd 5 
c cd to 

o. ca 
-= ~ CD 

S CD _ 

CO - 

=! > (D 
. . CD Q_ 

<- E 


CO 


O LO o 

CO I LO 

A co V 


t 


.g c 

CD .£ 


o 
^ A 
+ ^ 
.CO -co 

LO w 
A ID 


E 


CD 

E 


j_ O -CJ 

i O 

-R 


O O 
O LO 

i— A 


c: cd 

CD O 

E "O 

_ CD 
CO s — 

a5 § 

si 

CD ,_ 

_ CD 03 

_ “■ E 


o ® 

E g 5 
.S -E 
3 | 

E 


^ E 


CO CD 

CD co 
o 03 


E 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















HEADACHE 


Step-by-step assessment 


LP may be required to exclude meningitis or 
SAH if CT does not yield a diagnosis and no 
alternative cause is apparent, e.g. toxicity, 
metabolic derangement. Review the presentation 
and, if appropriate, evaluate for seizure (p. 276), 
coma (see Ch. 7) or 'Limb weakness’ (see Ch. 22). 
Seek urgent Neurology input if the cause remains 
unclear. 


Meets criteria for ‘sudden-onset’ 
headache? 


Exclude SAH in any patient with a severe ‘first 
or worst’ headache that reaches peak intensity 
within 5 min of onset and persists for >1 hour. 

Headache in SAH may not be instantaneous 
in onset but almost always reaches maximal 
intensity within 5 min and rarely resolves in <1 
hour In these circumstances, no clinical features 
can reliably rule out the diagnosis so neuroimag¬ 
ing ± CSF analysis is mandatory. CT has almost 
100% sensitivity for SAH when performed within 
6 hours on a contemporary multi-slice scanner 
and reported by a qualified radiologist. Beyond 
6 hours, if the CT is normal, then LP, at least 
12 hours from the onset of headache, must be 
performed to look for xanthochromia; its absence 
effectively excludes SAH. The major differential 
diagnosis is benign thunderclap headache; 
however, all sudden-onset severe headaches 
should, ideally, be discussed with a neurologist. 


5 


Suspect acute glaucoma? 


Acute glaucoma is sight-threatening. Request 
urgent Ophthalmology review if the patient has 
acute-onset headache (especially frontal or 
periorbital) accompanied by any of the following 
features: 

• conjunctival injection 

• clouding of the cornea 

• irregular/non-reactive pupil 

• ivisual acuity or blurred vision 

• sees coloured ‘halos’ around lights. 


6 


Age >50 years + any features of temporal 
arteritis (Box 18.3)? 


Suspect temporal arteritis in patients >50 years 
with new-onset headache and any features 
shown in Box 18.3. Check ESR and CRP 
urgently; ESR >50 mm/hour makes the diagnosis 


Box 18.3 Features suggesting temporal arteritis 


• Pain localized to temporal or occipital region 

• Inflamed, thickened, pulseless or tender temporal 
artery 

• Scalp tenderness 

• Jaw claudication 

• Visual loss (may be temporary initially) 

• Constitutional symptoms: fever, malaise, fatigue, 
night sweats, weight loss 

• Symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica (proximal pain, 
stiffness, etc.) 


Box 18 4 Red flag features 


• New-onset headache/change in headache in patients 
over 50 years 

• Focal CNS signs, ataxia or new cognitive or 
behavioural disturbance 

• Persistent visual disturbance 

• Headache that changes with posture or wakes the 
patient up 

• Headache brought on by physical exertion 

• Papilloedema 

• New-onset headache in a patient with HIV, active 
malignancy or immunocompromised 


highly likely. In these circumstances, or where 
clinical suspicion is high, e.g. >2 features from 
Box 18.3, start steroid therapy immediately. A 
prompt response to steroids essentially confirms 
the diagnosis, though, ideally, temporal artery 
biopsy should be performed within 2 weeks of 
starting steroids. 


7 


Red flag features (Box 18.4)? 


Regardless of headache duration, you must 
exclude serious underlying intracranial pathology 
if any features in Box 18.4 are present. Arrange 
CT brain ± MRI and if normal, seek input from a 
neurologist. Consider benign intracranial hyper¬ 
tension in patients with features of Tintracranial 
pressure but no mass on neuroimaging. 


Frontal headache + nasal symptoms? 


Whilst frontal headache may raise the suspicion 
of sinusitis, the diagnosis should only be made 
when there are associated nasal symptoms Look 
for at least two of: 

• nasal blockage/congestion 

• rhinorrhoea/discharge 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 























HEADACHE 


173 


Step by-step assessment 


Table 18 2 Diagnostic criteria for headache 


Migraine 

Cluster 

Tension-type 

Episodes 

>5 headache episodes 
meeting the following criteria, 
or >2 episodes associated with 
typical aura (see Box 18.1) 

>5 episodes of headache with: 

>10 episodes of 
headache with the 
following criteria: 

1 . 

Headache duration of 4-72 
hours 

Severe, unilateral orbital, 
supraorbital or temporal pain 
lasting 15-180 minutes 

Duration 30 minutes to 

7 days 

2. 

>2 of: 

Unilateral location 

Pulsating quality 

Moderate to severe intensity 
Disabling 1 

Frequency of attacks: 

1 per 2 days to 8 per day 

>2 of: 

Bilateral location 

Pressing or tightening 
(non-pulsating) quality 

Mild to moderate intensity 
Non-disabling 2 

3. 

>1 of: 

Nausea ± vomiting, 

Photophobia + phonophobia 

>1 of: 

Restlessness/agitation or 
Ipsilateral facial signs 3 

None of: 

Photophobia 

Phonophobia 

Nausea 

Vomiting 

1 Aggravation by or causing avoidance of routine physical activity, e.g. walking or climbing stairs. 

2 Not aggravated by or causing avoidance of routine physical activity, e.g. walking or climbing stairs. 

3 Conjunctival injection, lacrimation, nasal congestion, rhinorrhoea, forehead and facial sweating, miosis, ptosis, eyelid oedema. Modified 
from Headache Classification Committee of the International Headache Society (IHS) 2013. The International Classification of Headache 
Disorders, 3rd edn (beta version). Cephalalgia. 33(9):629-808. 


18 


• loss of smell 

• facial pressure or tenderness. 

Further investigation is not necessary in acute 
sinusitis but refer the patient to ENT if there are 
chronic symptoms. 


Features of primary headache disorder 

9 (Table 18.2)? 

Primary headache disorders, e.g. tension head¬ 
ache, migraine are responsible for most headaches. 


Diagnosis relies on associated features and pat¬ 
terns of presentation (see Table 1 8.2). By defini¬ 
tion, they cannot be diagnosed on the basis of a 
single episode. However, where the presentation 
is typical, it may be reasonable to class a case as 
a likely first presentation of a primary headache 
disorder. Where a recurrent headache does not 
fit neatly into a diagnostic category, refer to a 
neurologist. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
















Jaundice 


Jaundice describes the yellow pigmentation 
of skin, sclerae and mucous membranes that 
results from accumulation of bilirubin within 
tissues. This may result from Tred cell breakdown 
(haemolysis), luptake/conjugation by the liver 
(hepatocellular dysfunction) or impaired biliary 
drainage (cholestasis). Jaundice is often further 
classified according to the anatomic location of 
the lesion: pre-hepatic - haemolysis; hepatic - 
hepatocellular dysfunction and/or intrahepatic bile 
duct obstruction; post-hepatic - extrahepatic bile 
duct obstruction. It is important to remember that 
patients may have more than one aetiology (e.g. 
alcoholic hepatitis on a background of cirrhosis 
due to chronic hepatitis C infection). 

Pre-hepatic causes of jaundice 

Haemolytic disorders (Box 19.1) cause accumula¬ 
tion of unconjugated bilirubin in plasma due to 
Tred cell destruction. LFTs are otherwise normal, 
but there may be anaemia with evidence of hae¬ 
molysis on blood tests and film. Clinical features 
of pre hepatic jaundice include normal coloured 
urine and dark stools. Biochemically there is an 
unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia. 

Hepatic causes of jaundice 

Problems with conjugation 

Gilbert’s syndrome is a benign congenital 
condition affecting 2-5% of the population. 
Decreased glucuronyl transferase activity limits 
bilirubin conjugation and therefore excretion into 
the bile, causing mild jaundice during periods 
of fasting or intercurrent illness. There are no 
other clinical/biochemical features of liver disease. 

Acute liver injury 

Toxic, infective, autoimmune, metabolic 
and vascular liver insults may lead to acute 
hepatitis. Jaundice results from impaired biliru¬ 
bin transport across hepatocytes. There may 


also be obstruction of biliary canaliculi due to 
inflammation and oedema. There is typically a 
disproportionate increase in ALT and AST rela¬ 
tive to ALP and GGT. Extensive liver damage 
may cause acute liver failure, characterized 
by jaundice, encephalopathy (Table 19.1) and 
coagulopathy (typically INR >1.5) in the absence 
of pre-existing liver disease. Causes of acute 
liver failure are shown in Box 19.2. 

Potential causes of acute drug-induced liver 
injury are listed in Box 19.3. LFTs may take 
months to normalize after drug cessation, 
especially with cholestatic injury. 

Acute alcoholic hepatitis may occur in individu¬ 
als without chronic liver disease following inten¬ 
sive binge drinking and presents with jaundice, 
constitutional upset, tender hepatomegaly and 
fever. 

In acute viral hepatitis, jaundice is usually 
preceded by a 1-2-week prodrome of malaise, 
arthralgia, headache and anorexia. Hepatitis 
A-E viruses are responsible for most cases; 
less common causes include cytomegalovirus 
(CMV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and herpes 
simplex. Diagnosis is confirmed by serology. 
Recovery occurs over 3-6 weeks in most 
cases, but chronic infection develops in up to 
10% of patients with hepatitis B and 80% with 
hepatitis C. 

A rare cause of infective jaundice is icteric 
leptospirosis (Weil’s disease), a severe illness 
characterized by deep jaundice, fever, bleeding, 
e.g. epistaxis, haematemesis, renal failure and, 
often, a purpuric rash. 

Autoimmune hepatitis most often presents 
with established cirrhosis but 25% of cases mani¬ 
fest as an acute hepatitis with jaundice and consti¬ 
tutional symptoms. It is more common in females 
(ratio 3:1), and there is an association with other 
autoimmune conditions. Serum immunoglobulin 
(IgG) levels are raised and serum autoantibodies 
may be present. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 









JAUNDICE 


Differential diagnosis 


175 


Table 19.1 West Haven grading of hepatic 
encephalopathy 


Stage 

Alteration of consciousness 

0 

No change in personality or behaviour 
No asterixis 

1 

Impaired concentration and attention 
span 

Sleep disturbance, slurred speech, 
asterixis, agitation or depression 

2 

Lethargy, drowsiness, apathy or 
aggression 

Disorientation, inappropriate 
behaviour, slurred speech 

3 

Confusion and disorientation, bizarre 
behaviour 

Drowsiness or stupor 

Asterixis usually absent 

4 

Comatose with no response to voice 
commands 

Minimal or absent response to painful 
stimuli 


Box 19.2 Causes of acute liver failure 


Drugs/toxins 

• Paracetamol overdose 1 

• Anti-tuberculous drugs 

• Ecstasy 

• Halothane 

• Amanita phalloides 

• Carbon tetrachloride 

Infection 

• Acute viral hepatitis (A, B, E) 1 

• Cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein—Barr virus (EBV) 

Vascular 

• Shock/ischaemic hepatitis 

• Budd-Chiari syndrome 

Other 

• Wilson’s disease 

• Autoimmune hepatitis 

• Acute fatty liver of pregnancy 

• Extensive malignant infiltration 

’Denotes common cause. 


Box 19.1 Causes of haemolysis 


Hereditary 

• Erythrocyte membrane defects 

Hereditary spherocytosis 
Hereditary elliptocytosis 

• Erythrocyte enzyme defects 

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency 

• Haemoglobinopathies 

Thalassaemia 
Sickle cell 

Acquired 

• Immune 

Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia 
Alloimmune: haemolytic transfusion reaction, 
haemolytic disease of the newborn 
Fragmentation syndromes 
Microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia, e.g. 
haemolytic uraemic syndrome/thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura 
Mechanical heart valves 

• Drugs, e.g. dapsone 

• Infections, e.g. malaria 

• Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria 


Box 19.3 Drugs causing acute hepatotoxicity 


Acute hepatitis 

• Paracetamol (in overdose) 

• Cocaine ecstasy 

• Aspirin, NSAIDs 

• Halothane 

• Anti-tuberculous therapy: pyrazinamide, isoniazid, 
rifampicin 

• Antifungals: ketoconazole 

• Antihypertensives: methyldopa, hydralazine, 
dronedarone 

Cholestasis/cholestatic hepatitis 

• Antibiotics: penicillins, e.g. flucloxacillin, co- 
amoxiclav, ciprofloxacin, macrolides, e.g. 
erythromycin 

• Chlorpromazine 

• Azathioprine 

• Oestrogens (including the oral contraceptive pill) 

• Amitriptyline 

• Carbamazepine 

• ACE inhibitors 

• Cimetidine/ranitidine 

• Sulphonamides 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 






























JAUNDICE 


176 


Differential diagnosis 


Box 19.4 Causes of cirrhosis 


• Chronic alcohol excess 

• Chronic viral hepatitis (hepatitis B or C) 

• Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) 

• Autoimmune hepatitis 

• Cholestatic 

Primary sclerosing cholangitis 
Primary biliary cirrhosis 
Secondary biliary cirrhosis 

• Metabolic 

Hereditary haemochromatosis 
Wilson's disease 
Alpha r antitrypsin defic ency 
Cystic fibrosis 

• Venous obstruction 

Cardiac failure 
Budd-Chiari syndrome 

• Drugs e.g. methotrexate 

• Cryptogenic 


Wilson's disease, an inherited disorder of 
copper metabolism, can present with acute 
hepatitis, and occasionally causes acute liver 
failure. A iserum caeruloplasmin is highly 
suggestive. 

Hepatic vein thrombosis (Budd-Chiari syn¬ 
drome) typically presents with upper abdominal 
pain, hepatomegaly and marked ascites due to 
liver outflow venous congestion. 

Cardiac failure may cause hepatic injury due 
to vascular congestion with resultant jaundice 
and TALT. 

Ischaemic hepatitis (‘shock liver’) may result 
from impaired hepatic perfusion in a patient with 
shock; the ALT is usually markedly raised. 

| Cirrhosis 

Chronic liver injury from any cause (Box 19.4) 
results in extensive hepatocellular loss, fibrosis 
and disturbance of the normal hepatic archi¬ 
tecture. Hepatocellular insufficiency leads to 
jaundice, coagulopathy and ialbumin. Portal 
hypertension and consequent porto-systemic 
shunting of blood result in oesophageal varices 
and hepatic encephalopathy (see Table 19.1). 
Portal hypertension, ialbumin and generalized 
salt and water retention, due to haemodynamic 
and endocrine abnormalities, lead to ascites. 
There may be characteristic ‘stigmata’ on 
examination (Box 19.5). 


Box 19.5 Stigmata of chronic liver disease 


• Spider naevi 

• Digital clubbing 

• Palmar erythema 

• Loss of axillary/pubic hair 

• Parotid swelling 

• Gynaecomastia 

• Testicular atrophy 


Modified from Headache Classification Committee of the 
International Headache Society (IHS) 2013. The International 
Classification of Headache Disorders, 3rd edn (beta version). 
Cephalalgia. 33(9) 629-808. 


Hepatic tumours 

Malignant infiltration by primary or, more com¬ 
monly, metastatic tumours may cause jaundice 
due to intrahepatic duct obstruction or extensive 
replacement of liver parenchyma Common 
associated features include cachexia, malaise, 
RUQ pain (stretching of the liver capsule) and 
hepatomegaly. 

Post-hepatic/biliary causes of jaundice 

Jaundice due to biliary obstruction is associ¬ 
ated with a pronounced rise in ALP and GGT 
(produced in the biliary epithelium). Clinical 
features may include pale stools, dark urine and 
itch. A raised PT may occur due to vitamin K 
malabsorption from the Gl tract. 

"] Gallstones 

Gallstones are the most common cause of 
extrahepatic cholestasis; the onset of jaundice 
is relatively rapid, may be intermittent and is 
typically accompanied by epigastric/RUQ pain. 
Cholecystitis is diagnosed on abdominal USS by 
an inflamed gallbladder (thick-walled) containing 
gallstones. A dilated common bile duct on USS 
implies extrahepatic biliary obstruction and may 
be due to gallstones lodged in the common 
bile duct (choledocholithiasis). The presence of 
RUQ pain, fever and rigors suggests bacterial 
infection proximal to the obstruction (ascending 
cholangitis) and requires prompt antibiotics and 
decompression (ERCP). 

Mirizzi’s syndrome arises from extrinsic 
compression of the common hepatic duct by 
a large stone within the gallbladder, with features 
of obstructive jaundice. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


















JAUNDICE 


Differential diagnosis 


Benign strictures 

Benign strictures may result from trauma, particu¬ 
larly during biliary surgery or as a consequence of 
inflammation within the biliary tree, e.g. recurrent 
cholangitis, pancreatitis. 

| Autoimmune 

In primary biliary cirrhosis, there is progressive 
destruction of the intrahepatic bile ducts. Ninety 
percent of patients are female. Pruritus usually 
precedes jaundice. The presence of anti- 
mitochondrial antibodies is diagnostic. Primary 
sclerosing cholangitis causes inflammation, 
fibrosis and strctures of the intrahepatic and 
extrahepatic biliary tree. It is more common in 
men and 75% of patients have ulcerative colitis. 


Malignancy 

Painless jaundice may represent a malignant 
cause of obstructive jaundice. Cancer of the 
head of the pancreas typically presents with 
insidious, progressive jaundice due to extrinsic 
compression of the common bile duct, often with 
marked weight loss, nausea and anorexia. Pain 
may be absent in the early stages. 

Cholangiocarcinoma is a malignant tumour of 
the intra-hepatic or extrahepatic biliary tree that 
most commonly presents with painless jaundice, 
often with pruritus. 

Other important causes of malignant extrinsic 
biliary compression include duodenal ampullary 
tumours and enlarged lymph nodes at the porta 
hepatis. 


19 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 







JAUNDICE 


Overview 


Full clinical assessment + LFTs, FBC, U+E, coagulat on screen 


Normal liver enzymes, PT, albumin? 


No 


Evidence of obstructive jaundice / 
cholestasis? 


J Yes 

Fever / Rigors / RUQ pain? 
^ No 

Dilated bile ducts on USS? 
No No 


Evidence of chronic liver disease? 

Yes 


1 

No 


(P-182) 


Yes 


Likely haemolysis or Gilbert’s syndrome 


Yes 


Suspect acute cholangitis 


Yes 


Extrahepatic obstruction 


-► 


Seek underlying 


ALT >500 U/L, tPT or 

Yes 

Acute liver injury (viral / autoimmune / 

features of encephalopathy? 


metabolic / ischaemic / toxic) 


No 


Palpable liver / 
suspected malignancy? 


No 


^ es Abdominal 
USS/CT 


Structural liver disease 


Chronic alcohol excess or 

Yes 

recent sustained alcohol binge? 


| No 



Likely drug culprit? 

Yes 


1 Nn 




Consider alcoholic hepatitis 


Discontinue 

drug 




Drug hepatotoxicity 


Consider viral / autoimmune hepatitis, hepatocellular carcinoma, metabolic liver disease 
Targeted investigation if suspected cause; otherwise full liver screen + abdominal USS 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


















































1 Evidence of chronic liver disease? 

In the absence of an established diagnosis, look 
for signs of chronic liver disease, particularly 
physical stigmata (see Box 19.5) and evidence 
of complications of cirrhosis, e.g. portal 
hypertension. 

• Multiple spider naevi, in the absence of 
pregnancy/pro-oestrogenic drugs, strongly 
suggest chronic liver disease. The other 
stigmata lack specificity individually but are 
helpful in combination 

• Ascites, especially in association with 
dilated, superficial periumbilical veins 
(‘caput medusae’), is a useful pointer 
to portal hypertension but may have 
other causes in jaundiced patients, e.g. 
intra abdominal malignancy or right heart 
failure with hepatic congestion. The rapid 
onset of ascites, jaundice, hepatomegaly 
and abdominal pain suggests acute Budd- 
Chiari syndrome. 

• Hepatic encephalopathy (see Table 19.1 ) 
and synthetic dysfunction (see below) 
may occur in acute liver failure but are 
highly suggestive of chronic liver disease 
when they occur against a background of 
previous clinical/biochemical evidence of 
liver disturbance. 

• Abdominal USS can demonstrate 
morphologic features of cirrhosis, e.g. 
coarse echotexture, Tnodularity and 
provide supportive evidence of portal 
hypertension (splenomegaly, reversed flow 
in the portal vein). In difficult cases, biopsy 
may be required to confirm the diagnosis 
and suggest the aetiology. 

Evaluate any patient with jaundice and a 
background of established or suspected cirrhosis 
as described in ‘Further assessment of chronic 
liver disease’ (p. 182). 


2 


Normal liver enzymes, PT, albumin? 


If there are no features of haemolysis or 
chronic liver disease, jaundice is mild (bilirubin 
<100 pmol/L) and LFTs are otherwise normal, 
the likely diagnosis is Gilbert’s syndrome. 

Consider haemolysis if features of liver disease 
are absent and blood results suggest tred cell 
breakdown (e.g. J-Hb, Tl_DH, lhaptoglobin, 


JAUNDICE 


Step-by-step assessment 


179 


red cell fragments on blood film) ± evidence 
of Tred cell production (e.g. Treticulocytes 
polychromasia). Further assessment is described 
on page 136. 


3 


Evidence of obstructive 
jaundice/cholestasis? 


A rise in ALP/GGT out of proportion to ALT/ 
AST suggests that jaundice is due to impaired 
biliary excretion, especially if accompanied by 
pale stools/dark urine. If there are features of 
sepsis, take bood cultures, give IV antibiotics, 
arrange urgent abdominal USS and discuss 
with the surgical team. Otherwise, perform 
USS to look for bile duct dilatation (indicating 
extrahepatic obstruction) and an underlying 
cause, e.g. gallstones. 

If USS does not show dilated bile ducts, 
proceed to step 4. 

If USS shows dilated bile ducts but does not 
reveal the underlying cause arrange further 
imaging. MRCP provides excellent definition 
of the biliary tree - request it if you suspect 
gallstones (acute or recurrent RUQ pain), or 
if there is a past history of biliary pathology. 
CT allows better visualization of the pancreas 
- arrange if jaundice is painless with an insidious, 
progressive onset, especially in the elderly, to 
exclude pancreatic cancer. ERCP also provides 
useful diagnostic information but is more often 
undertaken subsequently to allow removal of 
gallstones or stenting of the ducts. 


ALT >500 U/L, TPT or features of 
encephalopathy? 

Identify patients with acute liver failure 

Look for features of acute liver failure in all jaun¬ 
diced patients without pre-existing liver disease 
or extrahepatic biliary obstruction, especially if 
there is evidence of extensive hepatocellular 
injury (TTALT). 

Hepatic encephalopathy (see Table 19.1) 
may be subtle; look closely for ^concentration/ 
alertness, mild disorientation, behavioural 
changes and reversal of the sleep/wake 
cycle. Test specifically for constructional 
apraxia, e.g. ask the patient to draw a five- 
pointed star or clock face and asterixis 
(Fig. 19.1). Exclude hypoglycaemia and other 


19 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













JAUNDICE 


Step-by-step assessment 



Fig. 19.1 Examining for asterixis. Asterixis (hepatic flap) 
is a repetitive, jerky tremor of the outstretched hands 
resulting in transient loss of extensor muscle tone at the 
wrist. It is due to metabolic brainstem dysfunction and is 
common in ventilatory failure, hepatic encephalopathy, 
renal fa lure and cardiac failure. (From Douglas G, Nicol F, 
Robertson C. Macleod's Clinical Examination, 12th edn. 
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2009.) 

metabolic abnormalities and consider CT brain 
to exclude intracranial pathology, especially if 
there are focal neurological abnormalities. EEG 
may assist the diagnosis. 

An Tpt (in the absence of anticoagulation, pre¬ 
existing coagulopathy or extensive cholestasis) 
indicates hepatic synthetic function; measure in 
all patients with jaundice - daily if there is TTALT 
or worsening jaundice. If T, do not correct unless 
there is major haemorrhage. 

Seek cause of acute liver injury 

Enquire about alcohol and paracetamol intake, 
all recent drugs (prescribed or otherwise) and 
possible exposure to environmental/occupational 
toxins, e.g. carbon tetrachloride. Check viral serol¬ 
ogy (IgM antibodies to hepatitis B core antigen 
(HBc), hepatitis A virus (HAV), hepatitis E virus 
(FHEV) CMV and EBV), serum caeruloplasmin, 
autoantibodies (ANA, ASMA, LKM) and gamma¬ 
globulins, and perform a full toxicology screen. 
Arrange abdominal USS to exclude Budd-Chiari 
syndrome and extensive malignant infiltration. 

I Repeatedly monitor and reassess patients 

with acute liver failure 

Monitor closely in ICU or a high dependency 
unit (HDU) for complications including: 

• hypoglycaemia 
• hyperkalaemia 


Box 19.6 King’s College Hospital criteria for 
liver transplantation in acute liver failure 


Paracetamol overdose 

• H + >50 nmol/L (pH <7.3) at or beyond 24 hours 
following the overdose 

or 

• Serum creatinine >300 pmol/L plus PT >100 
seconds (INR > \6.5) plus encephalopathy 
grade 3 or 4 

Non-paracetamol cases 

• PT >100 seconds (INR >6.5) 
or 

• Any three of the following: 

jaundice to encephalopathy time >7 days 
age <10 or >40 years 

indeterminate (non-A, non-ES hepatitis) or drug- 
induced causes 
bilirubin >300 pmol/L 
PT >50 seconds (INR >3.5) 

Creatinine of 300 pmol/L = 3.38 mg/dL. Bilirubin of 
300 (jmol/L = 17.6 mg/dL. 

Modified from O'Grady JG, Alexander GJ, Hay liar KM, Williams 
R, 1989. Early indicators of prognosis in fulminant hepatic 
failure. Gastroenterology. 97(2):439-445. 


• metabolic acidosis 

• renal failure (develops in >50%, often 
necessitating haemofiltration) 

• cerebral oedema with Tintracranial pressure 

• bacterial or fungal infection. 

Use the King’s College criteria (Box 19.6) to 
identify patients who may require transplantation. 
Liaise early and closely with a specialist liver unit 
to enable timely transfer if necessary. 


5 


Palpable liver/suspected malignancy? 


Consider abdominal USS or CT to exclude 
malignant or other structural liver disease if the 
patient has: 

• clinical evidence of hepatomegaly 

• known malignancy with metastatic potential 

• a palpable abdominal/rectal mass or 
lymphadenopathy 

• ascites in the absence of chronic liver 
disease 

• unexplained weight loss/cachexia/ 
lymphadenopathy. 

Any abnormal lesions identified may require 
biopsy for a tissue diagnosis. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















6 


Chronic alcohol excess or recent 
sustained alcohol binge? 


Establ sh alcohol intake in all jaundiced patients. 
Be tactful but persistent. Start with a general 
enquiry before quantifying typical weekly intake. 
In addition to the total number of drinks, consider 
the alcohol content (ask about brand if necessary) 
and, for spirits, the measure per drink. Screen 
for potential problem drinking (see Box 2.1, 
p. 11). Seek a collateral history from relatives 
and friends, and observe closely for features of 
alcohol withdrawal if you suspect covert alcohol 
abuse. 

Suspect alcoholic hepatitis in any patient with 
longstanding excessive consumption, e.g. >40 
units/week or recent binge drinking (e.g. >100 
units/week), or who develops severe withdrawal 
symptoms after 24-48 hours in hospital. Helpful 
supporting features include tender hepatomegaly 
and an AST: ALT ratio of >1. Once the diagnosis 
is made, calculate the Glasgow alcoholic hepatitis 
score to assess prognosis and guide treatment. 


7 


Likely drug culprit? 


Enquire about ALL drugs taken within the 
preceding 6 weeks including over-the-counter, 
e.g. NSAIDs, paracetamol and herbal remedies. 
Box 19.2 contains some common causes of 
hepatotoxicity but there are many others; consult 
with a pharmacist or review the literature if 
uncertain. Wherever possible, discontinue any 
suspected drug culprit and observe the effect 
on bilirubin and LFTs. Liver biochemistry may 
take months to normalize, so consider further 
investigations (see below) in the interim unless 
clinical suspicion of drug toxicity is very high, 


JAUNDICE 


Step by-step assessment 


181 


e.g. the patient recently started co-amoxiclav 
or anti-tuberculous therapy. 


8 


Consider other causes. Targeted 
investigation or full liver screen 


If the cause remains uncertain, screen for viral, 
autoimmune, hereditary and metabolic conditions 
(Box 19.7), arrange an abdominal USS if not 
already performed and confirm alcohol intake. 
If there is fever, purpura, ^platelets, conjunctival 
congestion or recent exposure to potentially 
contaminated water (e.g. freshwater sports, 
sewage worker), send blood and urine samples 
for leptospiral culture, serology ± PCR (liaise 
with the microbiology laboratory) and consider 
empirical antibiotic treatment. Liver biopsy may 
be required if jaundice persists without a clear 
cause and potential drug culprits have been 
removed. 


Box 19.7 Screening investigations in jaundice/ 
suspected liver disease 


Serology 

• Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), Hepatitis C 
antibodies HCV Ab (+ IgM antibodies to HBc, HAV, 
HEV, CMV and EBV if acute) 

Metabolic 

Ferritin, alpha,-antitrypsin level, caeruloplasmin 

Autoimmune 

• AMA, ASMA, ANA, LKM, immunoglobulins 

Other 

• Abdominal USS, alpha-fetoprotein, paracetamol level, 
toxicology screen 


19 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















JAUNDICE 


Further assessment 


Further assessment of chronic 
liver disease 

Step 1 Establish the underlying cause 

Try to determine the underlying aetiology in all 
new presentations of cirrhosis or in situations 
where the cause is unclear. Assess alcohol intake 
and perform screening investigations as listed in 
Box 19.7. Exclude treatable causes (e.g. Wilson’s 
disease, haemochromatosis). Consider referral 
for liver biopsy if the cause remains uncertain. 

Step 2 Look for evidence of complications/ 
decompensation 

Assess all patients with known or suspected 
cirrhosis for complications. Evaluate for hepatic 
encephalopathy and examine for ascites, 
oedema jaundice and malnutrition. Measure 
album n and PT to assess hepatic synthetic 
function, as well as bilirubin, U+E (hyponatraemia, 
hepatorenal syndrome) and FBC (anaemia, 
thrombocytopenia). Consider investigation for 
pulmonary complications such as pleural effu¬ 
sion, hepatopulmonary syndrome and pulmonary 
hypertension in patients with breathlessness, 
cyanosis or -lSp0 2 . If not already done screen 
for oesophageal varices with UGIE and for 
hepatocellular carcinoma with 6-12-monthly 
abdominal USS; USS will also detect small- 
volume ascites and splenomegaly. 

Step 3 Seek precipitants of decompensation 

Patients with cirrhosis have limited hepatic meta¬ 
bolic reserve and many factors can precipitate 
acute decompensation including spontaneous 
bacterial peritonitis, other intercurrent infection, 
surgery, alcohol excess, hepatotoxic drugs and 
hepatocellular carcinoma. 

In a cirrhotic patient who develops jaundice, 
coagulopathy or encephalopathy: 

• perform a full sepsis screen (see Clinical 
tool, p. 142), including an ascitic tap for 
microscopy and culture if ascites is present 

• review all drugs and alcohol intake 


• ensure that an abdominal USS has been 
performed within the last 6 months. 

Additionally, in patients with encephalopathy: 

• seek evidence of upper Gl bleeding (stool 
evaluation, -iHb, Turea) 

• look for and correct constipation (PR 
examination, stool chart)/dehydration/ 
electrolyte disturbance 

• minimize use of opioids and other sedative 
drugs. 

In cases of worsening ascites, evaluate salt and 
water intake and compliance with diuretics, 
exclude spontaneous bacterial peritonitis and 
consider Budd-Chiari syndrome. 

Step 4 Assess prognosis 

Use the Child-Pugh classification (Table 19 2) 
to assess prognosis in patients with cirrhosis. 
Other poor prognostic factors include Tcreatinine 
and lNa + , a small liver and variceal haemor¬ 
rhage. Consider referral to a transplant centre 
for patients with Child-Pugh grade B or C. 
Absolute contraindications to transplantation 
include metastatic malignancy, active sepsis, 
cholangiocarcinoma and active alcohol or IV 
drug abuse. 


Table 19.2 Child-Pugh classification 
of cirrhosis 


Score 1 

2 

3 

Bilirubin (pimol/L) <34 

34-50 

>50 

Albumin (g/L) >35 

28-35 

<28 

Ascites None 

Mid 

Marked 

Encephalopathy None 

Mild 

Marked 

Prolongation of <4 

PT (seconds) 

4-6 

>6 

Child A = Score <7:1 -year survival 82% 

Child B = Score 7-9:' 

1 -year survival 62% 

Child C = Score >9:1 ■ 

-year survival 42% 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















This page intentionally left blank 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 




Joint swelling 


This chapter relates primarily to acute swelling 
of the knee, hip, elbow, shoulder and ankle. 
Swelling may arise from periarticular structures 
(bursae, tendons, muscles) or the joint. Condi¬ 
tions affecting the joint itself usually cause diffuse 
swelling, warmth, tenderness and restriction in 
both active and passive movement. In contrast, 
bursitis/tendinopathies cause localized tender¬ 
ness and swelling in the area of the joint but 
with minimal restriction in joint movement. Pain 
is limited to certain planes of movement and is 
worse with active rather than passive movement. 

Periarticular conditions 

Bursitis is most commonly caused by repetitive 
movement, particularly if pressure is applied over 
the bursa during the process. Symptoms may 
arise after unaccustomed activity. Less often it 
may result from infection, rheumatoid disease 
or gout. Common sites of bursitis are pre-/infra- 
patellar (knee) olecranon (elbow), trochanteric 
(hip) and subacromial (shoulder). 

Tendinopathies and enthesopathies (where 
the tendon attaches to the bone) are usually 
caused by overuse or by repetitive minor 
trauma. Other causes include infection and 
systemic conditions, e.g. rheumatoid disease, 
gout/pseudogout, Reiter’s disease ankylosing 
spondylitis. Tenderness over the tendon, with 
discomfort aggravated by movement, is usual 
and crepitus may be detected. Common sites 
for enthesopathies are the elbow (lateral and 
medial epicondyles) and knee. Osgood-Schlatter 
disease (inflammation of the patellar tendon at 
the tibial tuberosity) is a common disorder in 
adolescents experiencing rapid growth spurts. 

Articular conditions 

Septic arthritis 

Septic arthritis may lead to irreversible cartilage 
and joint destruction, and so should be identified 


or excluded early. Haematogenous spread is 
the usual route of infection, but local skin or 
bone infection may occur. Common organisms 
are S. aureus, N. gonorrhoeae and Salmonella 
spp. Risk factors include a prosthetic joint, 
skin infection, joint surgery, diabetes mellitus, 
increasing age, immunocompromise and IV drug 
use. Pain, swelling, tenderness and erythema 
develop over a few hours. The joint is often 
held in slight flexion with the patient extremely 
reluctant to move it. Fever and TWBC/CRP may 
be present but are unreliable features, particularly 
in patients taking steroids or NSAIDs and in the 
immunosuppressed. 

Trauma 

Trauma may result in haemarthrosis if there is 
injury to a vascular structure within the joint (a 
fracture or ligamentous injury) or to a traumatic 
effusion, e.g. from a meniscal tear in the knee. 

Any local penetrating injury predisposes to 
infection and requires urgent surgical debride¬ 
ment and washout. 

Crystal arthropathy 

The two most common forms are gout (uric 
acid) and pseudogout (calcium pyrophosphate). 

A past history of gout, alcohol excess, 
diuretic use and renal stones are risk factors, 
as are conditions that cause high cell turnover 
(polycythaemia, lymphoma, psoriasis). In acute 
gout the meta arso-phalangeal joint of the great 
toe is most frequently affected, followed by the 
ankle, knee, small joints of the feet/hands, wrist 
and elbow. Onset is often sudden and exquisitely 
painful. The affected joint is hot, red and swollen, 
with shiny overlying skin. 

Reactive arthritis 

Reactive arthritis is an autoimmune, non-purulent 
arthritis that arises as a result of infection 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 











JOINT SWELLING 


Differential diagnosis 


185 


elsewhere in the body, typically within 4 weeks 
of Gl or GU infection ( Chlamydia, Campylobacter, 
Yersinia, Salmonella, Shigella). The swelling may 
appear suddenly or develop over a few days 
following an initial spell of joint stiffness in the 
joints. The disorder most commonly affects men 
between 20-50 years old and typically lasts for 
2-6 months. The most commonly affected joints 
are lower limb large joints and sacroiliac joints. 
The classic triad of reactive arthritis comprises 
non-infectious urethritis, conjunctivitis/anterior 
uveitis and arthritis. However, this is found only 
in a minority of patients. 

I Polyarthropathy presenting as 

monoarthropathy 

Osteoarthritis commonly affects the hands, 
feet, spine and the large weight-bearing joints, 
such as the hips and knees. Acute single-joint 
exacerbations may follow minor trauma. It usually 
evolves insidiously over months to years but 
may present with an acute exacerbation. Other 
polyarthopathies such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 
or psoriatic arthritis may occasionally present 
with disproportionate or isolated swelling of a 
single joint but definitive diagnosis of RA requires 
involvement of more than one joint (Table 20.1). 

Bone cancer and secondary deposits 

Any bone tumour near a joint can potentially 
cause swelling, although pain is usually the 
presenting feature. The most common cancers 
to metastasize to bone are those of the breast, 
lung, kidney, prostate and thyroid. Most lesions 
are visible on X-ray. Be careful to investigate 
patients who present with joint swelling following 
(minor) trauma that fails to settle as this may be 
a presentation of bone malignancy. 


Table 20.1 The 2010 American College of 
Rheumatology/European League Against 
Rheumatism classification criteria for 
rheumatoid arthritis 


Criterion 

Score 

A. Joint involvement 

1 large joint 

0 

>1 large joints 

1 

1-3 small joints (± involvement of 

2 

large joints) 

4-10 small joints (± involvement of 

3 

large joints) 

10 joints (at least 1 small joint) 

5 

B. Serology 

Negative RF and negative ACPA 

0 

Low-positive RF or low-positive ACPA 

2 

High-positive RF or high-positive ACPA 

3 

C Acute-phase reactants 

Normal CRP and normal ESR 

0 

Abnormal CRP or abnormal ESR 

1 

D. Duration of symptoms 

<6 weeks 

0 

>6 weeks 

1 


’A score of >6/10 indicates definite RA. 

ACPA - Anti-citrullinated protein antibody. 

Source modified from Aietaha D, Neogi T, Silman AJ et al. 

2010. Rheumatoid arthritis classification criteria: an American 
College of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism 
collaborative in dative. Arthritis Rheum. 62(9):2582-2591. 


20 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















JOINT SWELLING 


186 “ 

Overview 


Full clinical assessment ± FBC, CRP, uric acid, blood cultures 


Significant trauma? 


Yes x - ra y 

Fracture or 

review 

haemarthrosis 


No 


3 Indication for joint aspiration? 


No 


No 


Evidence of other joint involvement? 


No 


Prosthetic joint? 

Yes 


J No 



review 


, 

Yes 

Positive Gram stain? 


No 

' 

Crystals? 

1 

No 

' 

High-risl 

features (see text)? - 


Yes 


-► Septic arthritis 


Urgent 

-► orthopaedic 

review 


Yes 


-► Likely gout / pseudogout 


Yes 


-► Orthopaedic review 


Acute presentation adequately 

Yes 

explained by recent trauma? 


' 

No 

r 


Recent GI/GU infection or evidence of 

Yes 

urethritis / conjunctivitis? 



No 



-► Soft tissue injury 


Likely reactive arthritis 


Yes 


Consider rheumatoid arthritis / 
osteoarthritis / seronegative 
spondyloarthritis 


-► 


Rheumatology 


Consider periarticular cause, haemarthrosis, rheumatic fever 
or monoarticular presentation of oligo- or polyarthritis (see Step 6) 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





















































JOINT SWELLING 


Step-by-step assessment 


187 


1 Significant trauma? 

Perform plain X-rays if the patient has a history 
of recent trauma. If a fracture is identified, refer 
to an orthopaedic specialist. 

Suspect haemarthrosis if severe joint swelling 
arises within 30-60 minutes of injury or occurs 
in a patient with impaired coagulation Aspiration 
of a tense, traumatic haemarthrosis may help 
alleviate pain - consult an orthopaedic specialist 
and correct any coagulation abnormalities prior 
to aspiration (under strict aseptic technique). 

In the absence of a coagulation abnormality, 
swelling that develops 24 hours or more after joint 
injury is likely to represent a traumatic effusion. 


2 


Prosthetic joint? 


In patients with a swollen/tender prosthetic joint, 
perform an X-ray and consult an orthopaedic 
specialist. Do not aspirate a prosthetic joint 
without prior orthopaedic consultation because 
of the risk of introducing infection. Aspiration 
of prosthetic joints is typically undertaken by 
orthopaedic specialists in a sterile operating 
theatre environment. 


3 


Indication for joint aspiration? 


Take blood for FBC, CRP, urate and blood 
cultures, but note that a normal WBC, and CRP 
do not exclude septic arthritis. Strongly consider 
plain X rays if not undertaken already. 

Perform joint aspiration (using strict aseptic 
technique) with urgent Gram stain and microscopy, 
followed by culture and sensitivity, in any patient 
with an acutely swollen, painful, warm joint in the 


absence of trauma, if you suspect septic arthritis. 
Aspiration of the knee is relatively simple but the 
other joints, especially the hip and ankle, require 
expert technique - seek orthopaedic help. Never 
aspirate through infected overlying tissues. 

A joint aspirate that shows organisms on 
Gram stain is diagnostic of septic arthritis but 
is only positive in 30-50% of cases. Elevated 
WBC detected in joint aspirate suggests infection 
(Table 20.2), even if the Gram stain fails to 
demonstrate organisms - seek expert advice. 

Crystal-induced arthropathy is suggested 
by the microscopic identification of monoso¬ 
dium urate in gout or calcium pyrophosphate 
dehydrate (CPP) in pseudogout crystals (see 
Table 20.2). However, this does not rule out a 
superimposed infection. 

In the absence of crystals or a positive Gram 
stain, seek orthopaedic review if the aspirate 
is bloody or there is any ongoing suspicion of 
septic arthritis, e.g. typical clinical presenta¬ 
tion, inflammatory aspirate (see Table 20.2) or 
immunocompromised patient. 


Acute presentation adequately explained 
by recent trauma? 


A significant proportion of acute large joint swell¬ 
ings in the context of trauma, with a normal 
X-ray, are soft tissue injuries with variable degrees 
of ligamentous/cartilaginous/tendinous injury If 
the history is diagnostic, and joint examination 
features are consistent with a soft tissue injury, 
and the X-ray is reassuring, manage the patient 
conservatively. Consider referral to physiotherapy 
if there are specific concerns regarding joint 
function and tissue injury. 


20 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













188 


JOINT SWELLING 


Step-by-step assessment 


Table 20 2 Features of inflammatory and non-inflammatory joint aspirates 


Non-inflammatory 
synovial aspirate 

Inflammatory synovial aspirate 

Macroscopic features 

Volume 

Small 

Large 

Appearance 

Clear, straw coloured 

Cloudy or opaque due to pus, red due to blood 

Viscosity 

High (hyaluronate present) 

Low (hyaluronate breakdown) 

Microscopic features 

Cellularity 

Low 

High (turbid fluid) 

WBC 

Low 

High (infection, RA, gout) (neutrophilpredominance 
suggests bacterial infection, eosinophilia suggests RA, 
tuberculosis, arthritis, Lyme disease) 

Crystals 

Absent 

Gout negatively birefringent MSU crystals 

Pseudogout: positively birefringent CPP crystals 

Glucose 

Slightly lower than serum 

Significantly lower than serum in infection 

P otein 

Normal 

Elevated 

Gram stain 

No organisms 

Assess for bacterial species 

Microbiological culture 

Negative 

Bacterial growth if present 


5 


Recent GI/GU infection or evidence of 
urethritis/conjunctivitis? 


In a young patient with non-traumatic acute 
arthritis in whom septic arthritis has been 
excluded, the presence of any of the following 
features is highly suggestive of reactive arthritis: 

• diarrhoea 

• urinary frequency 

• dysuria or urgency 

• urethral discharge within the preceding 6 
weeks (typically 1-3 weeks) 

• genital ulceration or circinate balanitis 

• symptoms/signs of conjunctivitis or iritis, 
e.g. pain, irritation, tearing, discharge or 
redness. 


6 


Evidence of other joint involvement? 


Examine all joints carefully, looking for evidence of 
swelling and/or tenderness; note the distribution 
and symmetry of additional joint involvement. 


The diagnostic criteria for RA are shown in 
Table 20.1. Consider a seronegative arthritis if 
there is prominent axial involvement/sacroiliitis or 
a history/clinical features of inflammatory bowel 
disease or psoriasis. 

Unless the diagnosis is clearly osteoarthritis, 
refer for specialist rheumatological assessment 


7 


Consider other causes 


Use USS to detect/assess effusions of the hip 
and shoulder joints and periarticular conditions - 
tendinopathies, bursitis and muscle haematoma. 
Always consider spontaneous haemarthrosis in 
patients with coagulopathy (including those on 
anticoagulation or with haemophilia). Evaluate 
for rheumatic fever if there is a flitting arthritis 
associated with other characteristic features (see 
Box 14.4, p. 148). Seek Rheumatology advice if 
you suspect a monoarticular presentation of RA 
(see Table 20.1), osteoarthritis or seronegative 
arthritis. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



























This page intentionally left blank 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



21 


Leg swelling 


The predominant cause of leg swelling is oedema 
- the abnormal accumulation of fluid within the 
interstitial space. Oedema may result from: 

• Thydrostatic pressure in the venous 
system due to Tintravascular volume or 
obstruction 

• -Iplasma proteins, mainly albumin, that 
retain fluid within the vascular compartment 
(i'oncotic’ pressure), or 

• obstruction to lymphatic drainage: 
‘lymphoedema’. 

Unilateral oedema usually indicates localized 
pathology, e.g. venous or lymphatic obstruction. 
Bilateral oedema may be due to a local cause 
but more often represents the combination of 
generalized fluid overload and gravity. Oedema is 
frequently multifactorial, so search for additional 
causes, even if you identify a possible culprit. 


Generalized oedema 
Cardiogenic causes 

Cardiogenic lower limb oedema is typically 
accompanied by other signs of volume overload + 
structural heart disease (Fig. 21 .1). In congestive 
cardiac failure (CCF), salt and water retention 
due to persistent neurohormonal activation leads 
to an T in intravascular volume. High systemic 
venous hydrostatic pressure may also be caused 
by high right ventricular filling pressures if there 
is concomitant right heart failure. In CCF, right 
heart failure may reflect involvement of the right 
ventricle (RV) in the underlying disease process 
(e.g. dilated cardiomyopathy) but is more often 
due to chronically high left sided filling pressures 
which leads in turn to pulmonary hypertension. 

In the absence of left heart disease, right heart 
failure may arise from other causes of pulmo 
nary hypertension (e.g. chronic lung disease, 
thromboembolism or primary pulmonary vascular 
disease), pericardial disease (e.g. constriction, 


tamponade) or primary right heart pathology (e.g. 
pulmonary/tricuspid valve disease, RV infarction, 
arrhythmogenic RV cardiomyopathy). 

Renal failure 

In advanced renal failure, isalt and water 
excretion results in fluid retention and Tsystemc 
venous hydrostatic pressure. Chronic renal failure 
and heart failure commonly co-exist (cardiorenal 
syndrome) and may both contribute to general¬ 
ized oedema. 

Hypoalbuminaemia 

Hypoalbuminaemia produces oedema by 
iplasma oncotic pressure. Causes include 
nephrotic syndrome (talbumin loss in urine); 
chronic liver disease (ihepatic synthesis of 
albumin); systemic inflammatory processes 
(leakage of albumin from the intravascular 
space due to increased capillary permeability 
± persistent synthesis of ‘acute-phase proteins’ 
such as CRP in preference to albumin); protein¬ 
losing enteropathy (leakage of albumin into the 
gut due to lymphatic obstruction or mucosal 
disease); and advanced malnutrition. 

Iatrogenic causes 

Box 21.1 lists drugs that cause oedema. 

Idiopathic cyclic oedema 

Idiopathic cyclic oedema commonly affects 
women, most frequently of child-bearing age. 
Bilateral leg oedema progresses through the 
day and is most prominent in the evening. The 
aetiology is unclear. 


Local causes of oedema 
Deep vein thrombosis 

Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) causes local oedema 
due to physical obstruction of venous drainage. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













LEG SWELLING 


Differential diagnosis 



Box 21.1 Drugs causing oedema 


• Calcium channel blockers 

• IV fluids 

• Corticosteroids 

• Mineralocorticoids (fludrocortisone) 

• Thiazolidinediones (glitazones’) 

• Withdrawal of diuretics 

• NSAIDs 

• Oestrogens 

• Progestagens 

• Te tosterone 

• Growth hormone 


Clinical features are notoriously unreliable; 
D-dimer and/or Doppler ultrasound are integral 
to diagnosis. Rarely, bilateral or inferior vena 
caval thrombosis may cause bilateral swelling. 

^Chronic venous insufficiency 

The most common cause of chronic unilateral 
and bilateral leg swelling. Incompetent valves in 
the deep and perforating veins impair venous 
return with a rise in hydrostatic pressure. There 
may be varicose veins and characteristic skin 
changes (Box 21 .2). Dependent/gravitational 
oedema is a variant of this condition, to be con¬ 
sidered if immobility is an issue, e.g. post stroke 
patients. 


Box 21.2 Skin changes in chronic venous 
insufficiency 


• Haemosiderin pigmentation 

• Atrophy 

• Hair loss 

• Varicose eczema 

• Induration and fibrosis of subcutaneous tissues 

• Ulceration 


Pelvic mass 

A pelvic mass may obstruct local venous 
drainage and increase hydrostatic pressure by 
compressing pelvic veins. With ovarian tumours, 
oedema is usually unilateral. Bilateral oedema 
is common in pregnancy because of Tblood 
volume and bilateral venous compression by the 
gravid uterus but the diagnosis is usually obvious; 
suspect DVT if there is a sudden increase in leg 
swelling, particularly in the third trimester. 

| Lymphoedema 

Causes include malignancy (lymphatic invasion 
or lymphoma), previous lymph node surgery or 
radiotherapy, filariasis and congenital lymphatic 
abnormalities. Early lymphoedema may be indis¬ 
tinguishable from other forms of oedema but 
with progression it becomes firm and non-pitting 
with characteristic skin changes (see below). 

Other causes 

Compartment syndrome (Tpressure, vascular 
compromise and tissue injury within a fascial 
compartment), rupture of a Baker’s cyst (a 
swelling of the semi-membranous bursa at the 
back of the knee) or gastrocnemius , superficial 
thrombophlebitis and cellulitis may all present 
with an acutely painful, swollen leg. 

Lipoedema is not true oedema but an accu¬ 
mulation of excess subcutaneous fat. There is 
typically bilateral symmetrical leg swelling that is 
non-pitting and spares the dorsum of the feet. 
P etibial myxoedema is an abnormal dermal 
accumulation of connective tissue components 
in Graves’ disease. It causes areas of non-ptting 
oedema on the anterior or lateral aspects of 
the legs, with pink/purple plaques or nodules. 
Most patients will have evidence of Graves’ 
ophthalmopathy. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

































LEG SWELLING 


Overview 


Full clinical assessment ± D-dimer (see text) 


Unilateral swelling? 

No ^ Yes 



Yes Doppler 


uss 


No 


Acute onset + pain / inflammation? 


No 


y es Consider cellulitis, thrombophlebitis, 

-► compartment syndrome, ruptured Baker's 

cyst / gastrocnemius 


Recent onset, progressive swelling 

Yes 

or clinical suspicion of malignancy? 


1 No «-. 



-► Must exclude underlying malignancy 


Non-pitting oedema or previous local 
lymph node dissection / radiotherapy? 


Yes 


-► Likely lymphoedema 


CT abdo/ 
pelvis 

Seekexpe t advice 


No 


Signs of venous insufficiency? 


Yes 


■+• Likely chronic venous insufficiency 


No 


Possible venous insufficiency; consider imaging to exclude deep vein thrombosis and 
malignancy if not yet performed 


Urinalys s, ECG, U+E, LFTs, albumin 


TJVP, pulmonary congestion or symptoms 


of heart failure? 


No 

r 

Serum albumin <30 mmol/L? 

1 

No 

Yes 

Likely drug culprit (Box 21.1)? 


. 

No -4 - 



Yes 

CCF / right heart 


failure / renal failure 


Yes 


-+■ Hypoalbuminaemia 


Echocardiogram 


Seek underlying 
’ cause 


or discontinuation 


- *■ 


Iatrogenic oedema 



Yes 






No 


Assess as per unilateral swelling if not already done 
Likely diagnoses are venous insufficiency or idiopathic oedema 
Consider lipoedema, pretibial myxoedema 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





































































LEG SWELLING 


193 


Step-by-step assessment 


1 Unilateral swelling? 

Examine both limbs for evidence of swelling and 
pitting If there is bilateral lower limb swelling 
even if asymmetrical, go to step 7. 


2 


Wells score >1 or +ve D-dimer? 


Consider DVT in any patient with unilateral limb 
swelling, even without apparent risk factors or 
other signs or symptoms. Pre-test clinical predic¬ 
tion tools, e.g. Wells score (Table 21.1), can 
guide further investigation Evaluate for bilateral 
DVT in any patient with risk factors and bilateral 
leg swelling. 


• If Wells score is >2, DVT is likely - arrange 
a Doppler USS scan to confirm/refute the 
diagnosis. 

• If Wells score is <2, perform a D-dimer 
blood test. If negative, DVT is excluded; if 
positive, arrange a Doppler USS scan 


Table 21.1 Wells score (deep vein thrombosis) 

Clinical feature 

Score 

Active cancer (treatment within 
last 6 months or palliative) 

+1 point 

Paralysis, paresis or recent plaster 
immobilization of leg 

+1 point 

Recently bedridden >3 days or 
major surgery under general/ 
regional anaesthesia in previous 

12 weeks 

+1 point 

Local tenderness along distribution 
of deep venous system 

+1 point 

Entire leg swollen 

+1 point 

Calf swelling >3 cm compared 
to asymptomatic leg (measured 

10 cm below tibial tuberosity) 

+1 point 

Pitting oedema confined to 
symptomatic leg 

+1 point 

Collateral superficial veins (non- 
varicose) 

+1 point 

Alternative diagnosis at least 
as likely as DVT, e.g. cellulitis, 
thrombophlebitis 

-2 points 

S urce: Wells PS etat. 1997. Value of assessment of pretest 
probability of deep-vein thrombosis in clinical management 

Lancet. 350(9094):1795-1798. 


• Ar ange Doppler USS in all pregnant 
patients with suspected DVT, as exclusion 
by D-dimer has not been validated in this 
group. 


3 


Acute onset + pain/inflammation? 


Consider cellulitis if swelling is accompanied by a 
discrete area of erythema, heat, swelling and pain 
± fever or TWBC/CRP; negative blood cultures/ 
skin swabs do not rule out the diagnosis. In 
superficial thrombophlebitis, signs are localized, 
with redness and tenderness along the course 
of a vein, which may be firm and palpable. 

A ruptured Baker’s cyst may be clinically 
indistinguishable from DVT; USS will reveal the 
diagnosis and exclude DVT. 

Consider gastrocnemius muscle rupture in 
patients with sudden onset of pain during sport¬ 
ing activity ± pain on muscle palpation (maximal 
at the medial musculotendinous junct on) - USS 
may be helpful. 

Consider compartment syndrome if unilateral 
limb swelling is accompanied by any of the 
features in Box 21.3; if suspected, check CK 
(rhabdomyolysis) and arrange urgent orthopaedic 
review. 


Box 21.3 Features of compartment syndrome 


Clinical context 

Lower limb fracture, trauma, crush injury, vascular injury 
Drug overdose or iGCS 

Symptoms 

Pain (especially if increasing or deep/aching) 

Paraesthesia/numbness 1 

Paresis/paralysis 1 

Signs 

Pain on passive muscle stretching 
Tense, firm or 'woody' feel on palpation 
iCapillary refill or absent distal pulses 1 
Muscle contracture 1 

Investigations 

TTck 

’Numbness, paraesthesia, paralysis, absent pulse and 
contracture are late features ; their absence does not exclude 
the diagnosis. 


21 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


































LEG SWELLING 


Step-by-step assessment 


4 


Recent onset, progressive swelling or 
clinical suspicion of malignancy? 


A pelvc or lower abdominal mass may produce 
leg swelling by compressing the pelvic veins or 
lymphatics. Exclude underlying malignancy if any 
of the following is present: 

• weight loss 

• previous pelvic cancer 

• postmenopausal or intermenstrual PV 
bleeding 

• a palpable mass or local lymphadenopathy 

• any new-onset, progressive, unilateral 
leg swelling with no clear alternative 
explanation. 

Perform a rectal ± vaginal examination, check 
a PSA level (males) and arrange imaging with 
USS (ransabdominal or transvaginal) or CT as 
appropriate. 


5 


Non-pitting oedema or previous local 
lymph node dissection/radiotherapy? 


Distinguish lymphoedema from other causes 
of swelling, as it is unlikely to respond to 
conventional treatments and should prompt 
consideration of an underlying malignancy (new 
or recurrent). Consider the diagnosis if any of 
the following is present: 

• previous pelvic malignancy, local 
radiotherapy or lymph node dissection 

• known or family history of congenital 
lymphatic anomaly 

• oedema that is firm and non-pitting 

• inability to pinch the dorsal aspect of skin at 
the base of the second toe (Stemmer sign) 

• thickening of overlying skin with warty or 
‘cobblestone’ appearance. 

If you suspect lymphoedema, seek expert 
advice and consider CT of the pelvis and 
abdomen to look for evidence of underlying 
malignancy. 


6 


Signs of venous insufficiency? 


Suspect chronic venous insufficiency if any of 
the fo owing is present: 

• characteristic skin changes (Box 21.2) 

• prominent varicosities in the affected limb 

• previous DVT or vein stripping/harvesting in 
the affected limb 


• longstanding pitting oedema with diurnal 
variation in a patient >50 years. 

If none of these is present, reconsider the need 
to exclude underlying DVT and malignancy, and 
assess as described for bilateral leg swelling to 
look for a cause of generalized oedema. 


TJVP, pulmonary congestion or 
symptoms of heart failure? 

TJVP signifies high central venous pressure 
(due to volume overload and/or tcardiac filling 
pressures) and therefore implies a cardiogenic/ 
renal cause for bilateral pitting oedema rather than 
local venous obstruction or low oncotic pressure. 
Assume CCF if patients also have suggestive 
symptoms (orthopnoea, paroysmal nocturnal 
dyspnoea, recent-onset exertional dyspnoea), 
a background of LV dysfunction, myocardial 
infarction or let sided valve disease or (irrespective 
of the JVP) clinical or CXR features of pulmonary 
congestion. Bear in mind the possibility of right 
heart failure secondary to pulmonary hypertension 
(or less commonly right heart disease) in patients 
with severe chronic lung disease or clear lung 
fields. In either case, arrange an echocardiogram 
to assess cardiac structure and function including 
LV/RV size and function, valvular function and 
pulmonary artery pressure. Even in the absence of 
TJVP or obvious pulmonary congestion, consider 
CCF and arrange an echocardiogram in patients 
with recent-onset exertional or nocturnal dysp¬ 
noea since these signs can be challenging to 
detect or subtle. 

Consider renal impairment as a cause or con¬ 
tributor to fluid retention if GFR<30; see ‘Further 
assessment of renal failure’ p. 230) and seek 
renal advice if new presentation, major change 
from baseline or severe oliguria. 


8 


Serum albumin <30 mmol/L? 


Hypoalbuminaemia may cause or contribute to 
oedema particularly when <25 g/L. Search for 
an underlying cause. 

Screen for nephrotic syndrome by urinalysis, 
looking for proteinuria. If the test is positive 
collect a 24-hour urine sample; >3 g protein/24 
hours confirms the diagnosis. 

Suspect -Ihepatic synthetic function if there 
are deranged LFTs or features of chronic liver 
disease (Box 19.5, p. 176) and PT is prolonged. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















LEG SWELLING 


195 


A persistent acute-phase response (resulting in 
-lalbumin synthesis) may occur in chronic infect¬ 
ion, inflammatory illness or occult malignancy. 
Suspect this if the patient has a persistently 
TCRP/ESR, recurrent pyrexia, lymphadenopathy, 
constitutional upset (fever, sweats, malaise, 
weight loss) or local signs or symptoms, e.g. 
palpable mass, active synovitis - investigate 
as for fever/pyrexia of unknown origin (p. 148). 

Consider protein-losing enteropathy and seek 
Gl advice if there is a history or symptoms of 
Gl disorder. Malnutrition must be prolonged and 
severe to cause a significant decrease in serum 
albumin and is a diagnosis of exclusion. 


9 


Likely drug culprit (see Box 21.1)? 


Drug causes are listed in Box 21.1. Where 
feasible, review after trial discontinuation. 


10 


Evidence of structural heart disease? 


Bilateral lower limb oedema is less likely to have a 
cardiogenic cause if there are no accompanying 
signs or symptoms of heart failure. However, 
in the absence of any clear alternative cause, 
consider echocardiography if there are any point¬ 
ers toward underlying structural heart disease 
including: 


Step by-step assessment 


• a past history of Ml, cardiac surgery, 
valvular disease, pulmonary embolism 
or chronic lung disease (e.g. COPD, 
obstructive sleep apnoea) 

• Heart murmur, S3, displaced apex beat or 
parasternal heave 

• Cardiomegaly on CXR 

• Significant ECG abnormality, e.g. Q waves, 
left or right bundle branch block; see Box 
6.1, p. 51. 


Assess as per unilateral swelling. Likely 
venous insufficiency or idiopathic oedema 

If there is bilateral swelling, first return to step 1 
and assess for ‘unilateral’ causes, e.g. bilateral 
DVT. 

Venous insufficiency is the likeliest cause in 
patients >50 years or in those with skin changes/ 
predisposing factors. Idiopathic cyclic oedema 
is a common cause in women of child-bearing 
age (mechanism not understood) but consider 
an echocardiogram to exclude pulmonary 
hypertension. Gravitational oedema may occur 
with longstanding immobility. 

If pitting is absent, consider lipoedema or 
pretibial myxoedema. 


21 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










Limb weakness 



Limb weakness may be focal or generalized. 
Diagnosis relies on careful clinical assessment, 
complemented, in most cases, by appropriate 
brain or spinal imaging. Current stroke manage¬ 
ment mandates urgent evaluation of unilateral 
limb weakness However, focal limb weakness 
can be caused by many non-stroke pathologies 
and these should not be overlooked in the rush 
to definitive management. 

Stroke 

Stroke is the most common cause of unilateral 
limb weakness. Patients typically present with 
sudden onset of weakness of the arm, leg or 
facial muscles, on one side. Symptoms persist 
for >3 hours and often do not resolve. An initial 
flaccid paresis progresses to upper motor neuron 
(UMN) weakness days later. There may be 
associated signs of cortical dysfunction (Box 
22.1) or other sensory, visual or coordination 
problems. Aside from rare examples, such as 
those affecting certain areas of the brainstem, 
symptoms and signs are consistently unilateral. 

Transient ischaemic attack (TIA) 

TIAs are temporary, focal, ischaemic insults 
to the brain. Symptoms and signs usually last 
for at least 10 minutes and are comparable to 
stroke but resolve entirely without permanent 
neurological sequelae. The traditional definition 
of TIA describes a syndrome lasting less than 
a day, but this does not correlate with modern 
knowledge of stroke - symptoms >3 hours are 
likely to show permanent ischaemic damage to 
the brain on advanced imaging. With rare excep¬ 
tions, TIAs do not cause loss of consciousness. 

Space-occupying lesions 

Space-occupying lesions, e.g. tumour, abscess, 
chronic subdural haematoma, can cause 
symptoms and signs mimicking stroke but the 
onset is typically more gradual and progressive. 
There may be features of raised ICP or clues 


to the underlying pathology, e.g. malignancy, 
or a source of septic emboli such as infective 
endocarditis. 

Spinal cord lesions 

Transverse lesions produce bilateral UMN limb 
weakness (para/tetraparesis), with loss of all 
sensory modalities below the spinal cord level 
and disturbance of sphincter function. Unilateral 
lesions (Brown-Sequard syndrome) cause ipsilat- 
eral UMN weakness and loss of proprioception 
below the cord level, with contralateral loss of 
pain and temperature sensation. 

Causes may be compressive lesions, e.g. 
intervertebral disc prolapse, trauma, vertebral 
metastases or intrinsic pathology, e.g. transverse 
myelitis, glioma, spinal infarct, vitamin B 12 defi¬ 
ciency. Circumferential pain across or sensory 
loss below a thoracic or lumbar dermatome 
suggests cord compression (but is not always 
present) - the level should correlate with neu¬ 
rological examination of the lower limbs. Saddle 
anaesthesia, bilateral leg pain, urinary retention 
and reduced anal tone suggest cauda equina 
syndrome, and should prompt urgent imaging. 

Peripheral nerve lesions 

Lower motor neuron (LMN) weakness may result 
from generalized disease of peripheral nerves 
(peripheral neuropathy), or from lesions affecting 
a plexus (plexopathy), spinal root (radiculopathy) 
or single nerve (mononeuropathy). In peripheral 
neuropathy, the longest nerves tend to be 
affected first, leading to a ‘glove-and-stocking’ 
pattern of weakness and sensory loss; in the 
other lesions, weakness and sensory loss reflect 
the muscles/skin regions innervated by the 
affected nerve(s) or nerve root. 

Motor neuron disease 

A chronic degenerative condition that presents 
with gradual, progressive weakness and a 
combination of UMN and LMN signs. There may 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















LIMB WEAKNESS 


Differential diagnosis 


197 


Box 22.1 Signs of cortical dysfunction 


• Visual field defect 

• Dysphasia 

• Dyspraxia 

• Neglect 

• Sensory or visual inattention. 


be bulbar involvement but sensory features are 
absent. 

Other causes 

Encephalitis may cause limb weakness as 
part of a constellation of central neurological 
symptoms including confusion, seizures and 


altered consciousness. Multiple sclerosis can 
present with almost any pattern of UMN limb 
weakness, though paraparesis secondary to 
transverse myelitis is most typical. Transient 
focal limb weakness can occur immediately 
after a focal seizure (Todd’s paresis). Migraine 
occasionally causes limb weakness (hemiplegic 
migraine) but this is a diagnosis of exclusion. 
Myasthenia gravis causes ‘fatigability’ of limb 
muscles. Generalized muscle weakness may 
result from congenital/inflammatory myopathy, 
e.g. polymyositis, endocrine or metabolic distur¬ 
bance, e.g. Cushing’s syndrome, hypokalaemia, 
or drugs/toxins, e.g. corticosteroids, alcohol; it 
is also a common, non-specific presentation of 
acute illness in frail, elderly patients. 


22 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 











LIMB WEAKNESS 


Bilateral limb weakness: overview 


1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 


7 



downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



















































LIMB WEAKNESS 


Bilateral limb weakness: step-by-step assessment 


1 Weakness strictly unilateral? 

Assess power in all four limbs and grade accord¬ 
ing to the MRC scale (Table 22.1). Ask about 
any pre-existing limb weakness that predates 
the current presentation, e.g. old stroke, and 
whether it has changed recently. In any rapid- 
onset weakness, perform aCBG; if <3.0 mmol/L, 
send blood for lab glucose measurement but 
treat immediately with IV dextrose and then 
reassess. 

If the current presentation of limb weakness is 
confined to one side of the body assess as per 
unilateral limb weakness (this includes patients 
with contralateral facial weakness). Otherwise, 
continue on the current diagnostic pathway, even 
if signs are markedly asymmetrical. 


2 


Acute-onset or rapidly progressive 
paraparesis? 


In any patient with sudden-onset or rapidly 
progressive paraparesis or tetraparesis: 

• immobilize the cervical spine pending 
imaging, if there is suspicion of recent 
trauma 

• discuss immediately with a vascular 
surgeon if weakness is accompanied by 
features of acute limb ischaemia, e.g. pain; 
cold/pale/mottled skin; absent pulses 

• otherwise, arrange urgent spinal imaging, 
usually MRI, to exclude cord compression 
or raumatic injury. 

If MRI confirms a compressive lesion, discuss 
with a neurosurgeon or oncologist, depending 
on the clinical context and likely cause. 


Table 22.1 Medical Research Council (MRC) 
power rating 

Grade 

Findings on examination 

1 

No movement, not even muscle flicker 

2 

Flicker of muscle contraction only 

3 

Movement possible only when action 
of gravity is removed and against no 
resistance 

4 

Can move against gravity but not 
completely against full active resistance 

5 

Normal power against full active 
resistance 


If MRI excludes cord compression (and does 
not yield a definitive alternative diagnosis) 
consider spinal stroke if the onset of weakness 
was very sudden, especially if accompanied 
by severe back pain. Examine for sparing of 
proprioception and vibration sense, and look 
specifically for MRI changes of spinal infarction. 
Otherwise, seek urgent neurological review and 
continue to assess as described below. 


Upper motor neuron signs, sensory level 
or sphincter disturbance? 


Bilateral weakness associated with UMN signs 
(Ttone, brisk reflexes, extensor plantar response), 
a sensory level (Fig. 22.1) and/or bladder/bowel 
dysfunction suggests myelopathy. 

Arrange an MRI spine to exclude cord 
compression and structural intrinsic 
spinal disease, e.g. syringomyelia, glioma, 
abscess. 

• If neither is present, check whether the 
patient has had previous radiotherapy 
(post-radiation myelopathy) and measure 
plasma vitamin B 12 levels to exclude 
subacute combined degeneration of the 
cord. 

• Suspect transverse myelitis if the MRI 
shows evidence of inflammatory change 
and the time from first onset of symptoms 
to maximal weakness was between 4 
hours and 21 days - refer to a neurologist 
for further evaluation, e.g. CSF analysis 
autoimmune and infective screen. 

• Suspect motor neuron disease 
(amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) if weakness 
is slowly progressive and sensory 
features are absent, especially if there are 
associated LMN signs, e.g. fasciculation, or 
bulbar involvement. 


Box 22 2 Symptoms and signs suggestive of 
raised intracranial pressure 


• Severe headache 

• iGCS 

• VI nerve palsy or unilateral pupillary dilatation 

• Vomiting 

• Bradycardia/systolic hypertension 

• Papilloedema 


22 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


























LIMB WEAKNESS 


Bilateral limb weakness: step-by-step assessment 



Fig. 22.1 Dermatomes. The 

blue dots indicate recommended 
sites for testing each dermatome. 
To assess for a sensory level test 
light touch and pinprick sensation 
in each dermatome on both sides. 
If sensation is abnormal in the 
lower dermatomes, move 
progressively upwards through the 
truncal/upper limb dermatomes 
until it normalizes. (From Ford MJ, 
Flennessey I, Japp A. Introduction 
to Clinical Examination, 8th edn. 
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 
2005.) 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 






























LIMB WEAKNESS 


Bilateral limb weakness: step by-step assessment 


Consider brain imaging to exclude bilateral 
intracranial lesions, e.g. cerebral emboli/ 
metastases, venous stroke, demyelination, in any 
patient with bilateral UMN limb weakness and: 

• no evidence of myelopathy, i.e. normal 
MRI spine, no sensory level/sphincter 
disturbance), or 

• associated cortical signs (see Box 22.1), 
features of TlCP (Box 22.2), cranial nerve 
lesions or cerebellar involvement. 

Consider CT angiography of the Circle of 
Willis to exclude basilar artery thrombosis in 
patients with bilateral but asymmetrical neurol¬ 
ogy associated with drowsiness and change in 
behaviour with a normal CT brain (seek expert 
advice). Obtain specialist neurological input in 
any suspected case of motor neuron disease or 
multiple sclerosis, or if the cause remains unclear. 


4 


Sensory signs or symptoms? 


In the absence of UMN signs, sphincter dys¬ 
function or a sensory level, the combination 
of bilateral or generalized limb weakness with 
sensory disturbance is usually due to peripheral 
neuropathy. 


Table 22.2 Clinical features of 

Guillain-Barre syndrome 

Remember these as the five ‘A’s: 

Acute course: 

Time from onset to maximal 
weakness = hours to 4 weeks 

Ascending 

weakness: 

Initially in legs, progressing to 
arms ± respiratory/bulbar/ 
facial muscles 

At presentation 60% have 
weakness in all four limbs; 

50% have facial weakness 

Areflexia: 

Absence of tendon reflexes helps 
to distinguish Guillain-Barre 
syndrome from myelopathy 

Associated 

sensory 

symptoms: 

Distal numbness, tingling or pain 
often precedes weakness 

Loss of proprioception more 
common than pain and 
temperature 

Autonomic 

involvement: 

Sinus tachycardia, postural 
hypotension, impaired 
sweating often present 

Urinary retention and 
constipation are later features 


Consider Guillain-Barre syndrome if distal 
lower limb numbness or tingling is followed by 
rapidly ascending weakness and absent tendon 
reflexes (Table 22.2). 

• Measure urinary porphyrins to exclude 
acute intermittent porphyria. 

• Confirm the diagnosis with nerve 
conduction studies and LP (TCSF protein 
with normal cell count and glucose). 

• Check and monitor vital capacity for 
evidence of respiratory depression. 

• Refer early to a neurologist for further 
evaluation. 

Slowly progressive limb weakness that is 
more marked distally with a ‘glove-and-stocking’ 
pattern of sensory loss strongly suggests a 
sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy, e.g. chronic 
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, 
hereditary sensorimotor neuropathy 

• Arrange nerve conduction studies to 
confirm peripheral nerve disease and 
differentiate demyelination from axonal 
degeneration. 

• Investigate for an underlying cause, e.g. 
serum protein electrophoresis, HIV test, 
urinary porphyrins, fasting blood glucose. 

Consider spinal imaging to exclude bilateral 
radiculopathy if sensory loss and motor signs 
follow a nerve root distribution (see Table 22.4). 


5 


Muscle fatigability? 


Consider myasthenia gravis if the history or 
examination findings suggest fatigable muscle 
weakness: initially normal muscle power that 
rapidly weakens with sustained or repeated 
activity. Ocular and bulbar muscles tend to be 
affected before limb muscles. 

Ask about the effect of exercise and other 
activities on weakness. 

• Enquire specifically about diplopia during 
reading, weakening of the voice and 
difficulty in chewing/swallowing after the 
fi st few mouthfuls of food. 

• Examine for ptosis. 

• Observe patients as they hold their arms 
above their head for a sustained period. 

• Listen while the patient counts to 50. 

In suspected cases, consider a Tensilon test 
if rapid confirmation is required, e.g. myasthenic 


22 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





















LIMB WEAKNESS 


Bilateral limb weakness: step-by-step assessment 


crisis or severe global weakness; otherwise, 
check for anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies, 
arrange a thoracic CT to exclude thymoma and 
seek expert neurological input. 

Tendon reflexes are normal in myasthenia 
gravis. If muscle fatigability is accompanied 
by absent tendon reflexes that can be elicited 
following sustained muscle contraction, con¬ 
sider Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome, 
a paraneoplastic syndrome - check for serum 
antibodies to voltage-gated calcium channels, 
arrange electrophysiological studies and screen 
for an underlying malignancy. 


6 


Proximal weakness with tenderness 
or tCK 


Suspect myositis if symmetrical proximal muscle 
weakness is accompanied by TCK. If the patient 
is taking statins reassess after a period of dis¬ 
continuation. Otherwise, send an autoantibody 
screen, including anti-synthetase antibodies, e.g. 
anti Jo-1 (associated with polymyositis); exclude 
other toxic causes, e.g. cocaine; and arrange 
muscle biopsy. 

Even if the CK is normal, consider further 
investigation with muscle biopsy in any patient 
with symmetrical proximal muscle weakness 
associated with aching, tenderness, pyrexia or 

Tesr. 


7 


Consider other causes 


Advanced myopathy may cause a degree of 
muscle wasting and diminished tendon reflexes 
but suspect an LMN lesion if there is flaccidity, 
absent reflexes and/or fasciculation. 

• Consider Guillain-ESarre syndrome if there 
is new-onset, progressive limb weakness: 
the features in Table 22.2 distinguish from 
other causes. If suspected, confirm with LP 
and nerve conduction studies. 

• Suspect lumbosacral plexopathy if there 
is severe pain and progressive weakness/ 
wasting of quadriceps with absent knee 
reflexes - arrange imaging to exclude 
malignant infiltration of the plexus and 
check fasting blood glucose to exclude 
diabetes mellitus (diabetic amyotrophy) 

• Exclude other causes of motor neuropathy 
- check serum lead and urinary porphyrins 
and arrange nerve conduction studies. 

• If nerve conduction studies are normal, 
the most likely diagnosis is motor neuron 
disease (progressive muscular atrophy) - 
arrange electromyography and refer the 
patient to a neurologist. 

In patients wth a ‘patchy’ pattern of weakness, 
examine to exclude multiple discrete peripheral 
nerve lesions (Fig. 22.2), i.e. mononeuritis 


Sensory 

Motor 


Sensory 

Motor 


Sensory 

Motor 



Abductor pollicis 
brevis 

Opponens 

pollicis 



Finger extensors 

Thumb extensors 
and abductors 

Wrist extensors 

Brachioradialis 



Small muscles 
of the hand except 
abductors pollicis 
brevis 

Ulnar half of flexor 
digitorum profundus 


Flexor carpi ulnaris 


Sensory 



Motor 


Toe dorsiflexors 


Foot dorsiflexors 


Foot evertors 




Fig. 22.2 Clinical signs in peripheral nerve lesions. [A] Median nerve. [B] Radial nerve. [CJUInar nerve [D] Common 
peroneal nerve. (From Douglas G, Nicol F, Robertson C. Macleod’s Clinical Examination, 12th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, 2009.) 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





















LIMB WEAKNESS 


Bilateral limb weakness: step by-step assessment 


multiplex; if suspected, arrange neurophysiologi¬ 
cal assessment and investigate for an underlying 
malignant vasculitic or infiltrative disorder. 

In patients with proximal muscle weakness 
± wasting and no associated neurological 
abnormality, screen for underlying metabolic, 
nutritional, endocrine and drug-related causes. 

• Enquire about alcohol intake. 

• Consider trial discontinuation of any 
potentially causative medication, e.g. statin, 
fibrate. 

• Check for an underlying biochemical 
disorder, e.g. iK + , TCa 2+ . 

• Look for clinical/biochemical features of 
diabetes, Cushing’s syndrome, Addison’s 
disease, thyroid disorders and acromegaly. 

• Check 25(OH) cholecalciferol alongside 
serum calcium, alkaline phosphatase and 


parathyroid hormone, if osteomalacia 
considered. At risk groups include the 
elderly, cirrhotic, malnourished patients and 
ethnic minority groups, but this is overall a 
more common problem than is recognized. 

Assess frail, elderly patients with generalized 
weakness as described in Ch 24. 

Consider a functional aetiology if there are no 
objective features of organic disease and the 
severity or pattern of weakness is inconsistent 
- especially if the patient has a background of 
other functional disorders, e.g. irritable bowel 
syndrome, fibromyalgia. 

Refer for specialist neurological evaluation if 
the cause remains unclear. 


22 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 




LIMB WEAKNESS 


Unilateral limb weakness: overview 


1 Sudden onset? 

No Yes 


Painful? 


No 


Seizure(s) or evidence of TlCP / cortical 
dysfunction / CNS infection? 


No 

Upper motor neuron signs? 

Yes 


No 


Yes 


Consider ischaemia, fracture, 
compartment syndrome 


Total duration <3 hours? 

Yes 


No 


Likely transient 
ischaemic attack 


Likely stroke 


Yes 


Consider space- 
occupying lesion, 
meningoencephalitis 


See Further 

■ - assessment of stroke 

(P- 207) 

■ - Neuroimaging 



Yes 

* 






• - *■ MRI spine 


No 


Consider space-occupying lesion, stroke, 
multiple sclerosis, motor neuron disease 


Signs referable to single nerve root / nerve? 


Yes 


*■ Radiculopathy / mononeuropathy 


No 


Consider plexopathy, multi-root compression, stroke, motor neuron disease, migraine, 
functional weakness 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 








































LIMB WEAKNESS 


205 


Unilateral limb weakness: step-by-step assessment 


1 Sudden onset? 

Evaluate weakness as ‘sudden-onset’ if it 
reaches maximal intensity within a few minutes 
from the first appearance of symptoms. 

If there is painful weakness of a single limb, 
consider vascular and orthopaedic causes: 

• compare pulses, colour, temperature and 
capillary refill with the unaffected limb - 
seek immediate vascular review if there is 
any suspicion of acute limb ischaemia 

• request an X-ray of the limb if there is any 
history of trauma 

• measure CK and request an urgent 
orthopaedic review if there are features 
of compartment syndrome (see Box 21 .3, 
p. 193). 

Consider post-ictal weakness (Todd’s paresis) 
if the history suggests seizure activity immediately 
prior to the onset of weakness - arrange rapid 
neuroimaging unless the cause of seizures is 
already established, the post-ictal phase is known 
to include limb weakness and the weakness is 
improving. 

Acute non-neurological illness or hypotension 
may exacerbate established limb weakness 
from an old stroke - suspect this if the current 
weakness is confined to the same territory as a 
previously documented persistent neurological 
deficit and there are other clinical/laboratory 
features to suggest acute systemic illness, but 
maintain a low threshold for further neuroimaging. 

In the absence of the above causes, sudden- 
onset unilateral weakness is highly likely to 
represent a stroke or TIA. If symptoms persist 
for >3 hours, then proceed, in the first instance, 
to ‘Further assessment of stroke’ (p. 207). 

Diagnose TIA if symptoms have resolved 
completely and lasted <3 hours. 

• Evaluate for risk factors and sources of 
embolism as described under ‘Further 
assessment of stroke’. 

• Assess the risk of impending stroke using 
the ABCDD score (Table 22.3). 

• Admit or arrange next-day specialist 
referral for any patient with >1 TIA 
n a week or an ABCDD score >4 for 
urgent control of risk factors and carotid 
Doppler USS. 


Table 22.3 ABCDD score in TIA 


1 

2 

Age 

>60 


Blood 

pressure 

Systolic >140 or 
diastolic >90 


Clinical 

features 

Speech disturbance 
no weakness 

Unilateral 

weakness 

Duration 
of attack 

10-59 minutes 

>60 minutes 

Diabetes 

Yes 



• Otherwise, consider discharge 
with appropriate secondary 
prevention and specialist follow up 
within a week. 

• Arrange neuroimaging prior to discharge in 
any patient taking warfarin. 


Seizure activity or evidence of 
Tintracranial pressure/cortical 
dysfunction/CNS infection? 


New-onset seizures, signs of cortical dysfunction 
(see Box 22.1) or evidence of TlCP (see Box 
22.2) suggest underlying brain pathology. 

• Arrange prompt neuroimaging (usually CT 
brain) to identify the cause. 

• Seek anaesthetic review prior to scanning if 
GCS <8 or signs of airway compromise. 

• See page 276 for further assessment of 
seizures. 

• in all cases, seek expert neurological advice 
and consider further investigation with LP 

± MR I if CT fails to reveal an underlying 
cause. 


22 


Consider meningoencephalitis if there is onset 
of limb weakness over hours accompanied by 
fever, meningism (Box 18.2, p. 169), purpuric 
rash or features of shock (Box 30.1 , p. 267). If 
meningoencephalitis is suspected, obtain blood 
cultures, give empirical IV antibiotics/antivirals 
and arrange urgent CT brain; thereafter, perform 
an LP for CSF analysis unless contraindicated 
(p. 170). 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


















LIMB WEAKNESS 


Unilateral limb weakness: step-by-step assessment 


3 Upper motor neuron signs? 

A UMN pattern of weakness indicates a lesion 
proximal to the anterior horn cell; progressive 
onset of weakness suggests a space-occupying 
lesion whilst a rapid onset favours a vascular or 
inflammatory cause. 

Exclude a unilateral cord lesion if there is dis¬ 
sociated sensory loss (ipsilateral proprioception/ 
vibration; contralateral pain/temperature) or a 
clear sensory level. Otherwise, arrange neuro¬ 
imaging; CT is the usual first-line modality but 
consider MR I if CT is inconclusive, especially if 
there are brainstem features, e.g. contralateral 
cranial nerve palsies or cerebellar signs. 

Consider an atypical presentation of motor 
neuron disease (usually bilateral) if neuroimaging 
fails to reveal a cause and sensory features are 
absent, especially if there are associated LMN 
signs. 


4 


Signs referable to single nerve 
root/nerve? 


In the absence of UMN signs, suspect a radicu¬ 
lopathy if clinical signs are referable to a single 


nerve root (Table 22.4), or a mononeuropathy 
if they correspond to a single peripheral nerve 
(see Fig. 22.2). If radiculopathy is suspected, 
consider a spinal MRI, particularly if weakness 
is progressive. 


5 


Consider other causes 


Perform 2 lesion or demyelination in any patient 
presenting with hemiparesis, even if there are 
no obvious UMN features; if results are normal, 
consider hemiplegic migraine. 

If weakness is confined to a single limb, 
consider muti-level root compression (see Table 
22.4) or plexopathy, e.g. lumbosacral plexopathy 
(see above) or brachial plexopathy. 

Otherwise, consider mononeuritis multiplex 
(see above), an atypical presentation of motor 
neuron disease (usually bilateral) or functional 
weakness. 

Seek expert neurological input in any case 
where the diagnosis remains unclear. 


Table 22.4 Clinical signs of nerve root compression 

Root 

Weakness 

Sensory loss (see Fig. 22.1) 

Reflex loss 

C5 

Elbow flexion (biceps), arm and shoulder 
abduction (deltoid) 

Upper lateral arm 

Biceps 

C6 

Elbow flexion (brachioradialis) 

Lower lateral arm, thumb, index finger 

Supinator 

C7 

Elbow (triceps), wrist and finger extensors 

Middle finger 

Triceps 

L4 

Inversion of foot 

Inner calf 

Knee 

L5 

Dorsiflexion of hallux/toes 

Outer calf and dorsum of foot 


SI 

Plantar flexion 

Sole and lateral foot 

Ankle 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 




















LIMB WEAKNESS 


Further assessment 


Further assessment of stroke 

Step 1 Assess eligibility for thrombolysis/mechanical 
clot retrieval 

If facilities are available, refer immediately to 
stroke team for consideration of thrombolysis/ 
mechanical clot retrieval in any patient with a 
potentially disabling stroke whose first onset of 
symptoms occurred within the last 4.5 hours 
(potentially longer time frame if mechanical clot 
retrieval available). Where the time of onset is 
uncertain, e.g. symptoms present on awakening, 
define it as the last time the patient was known 
to be well. Assess rapidly for contraindications 
(Box 22.3) in conjunction with the on-call stroke 
team. In patients who meet clinical eligibility 
criteria, arrange immediate CT brain to exclude 
haemorrhagic stroke. 

Step 2 Classify stroke according to clinical and 
radiological findings 

Arrange neuroimaging to differentiate haemor¬ 
rhagic stroke from ischaemic stroke and to 
exclude non-stroke pathology, e g. space- 
occupying lesion. Perform a CT brain urgently if 

• the patient is eligible for thrombolysis 
(see above) 

• coagulation is impaired 

• -iGCS 

• symptoms include a severe headache 

• there is a rapidly progressive neurological 
deficit 

• cerebellar haemorrhage is suspected 
(to exclude obstructive hydrocephalus). 

Otherwise, perform CT within 12 hours of 
presentation. Irrespective of CT findings, use the 
Bamford classification (Box 22.4) to categorize 
stroke. 


Box 22.3 Contraindications to thrombolysis 


• Seizure at stroke onset 

• Symptoms suggestive of subarachnoid haemorrhage 

• Prior intracranial haemorrhage 

• Intracranial tumour 

• Stroke or serious head trauma within last 3 months 

• Arterial puncture at a non-compressible site or LP 
within 1 week 

• Active haemorrhage 

• Suspected acute pericarditis or aortic dissection 

• Systolic BP >185 mmHg or diastolic BP >110 mmHg 

• INR >1.7, thrombocytopenia or bleeding disorder 

• Pregnancy 


'Most are relative contraindications - seek guidance from the 
on-call stroke team if the patient is otherwise eligible. 


Step 3 Evaluate for risk factors/underlying cause 

In any patient with ischaemic stroke, identify modifi¬ 
able risk factors for vascular disease, including 
hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, smoking and 
diabetes; arrange Doppler USS to determine the 
presence and severity of carotid stenosis unless the 
affected territory is within the posterior circulation 
or the patient is unfit for vascular surgery. 

Suspect a cardiac source of cerebral embolism 
if the patient has 

• current or previous evidence of atrial fibrillation 

• a recent myocardial infarction 

• clinical features suggesting endocarditis, 
e.g. fever and new murmur 

• >2 cerebral infarcts (especially in different 
territories) 

• other systemic embolic events, e.g. lower 
limb ischaemia. 

Consider further investigation with transthoracic 
and, in selected cases, transoesophageal 
echocardiography. 

Investigate for an unusual cause of stroke in 
younger patients without vascular risk factors. 

• Perform a vasculitis and thrombophilia screen. 

• Request a bubble contrast echocardiography 
to detect a right-to-left shunt, e.g. patent 
foramen ovale that would permit ‘paradoxical 
embolism from the venous circulation. 

• Consider MRA to exclude carotid/vertebral 
artery dissection. 


Box 22.4 Bamford classification of stroke 


This separates stroke into four clinical presentations that 
relate to the affected vascular territory and correlate with 
prognosis. 

TACS (total anterior circulation stroke) 

• All three of: 

1. weakness/sensory deficit affecting 2 out of 3 of 
face/arm/leg 

2. homonymous hemianopia 

3. cortical dysfunction, e.g. dysphasia, apraxia 

PACS (partial anterior circulation stroke) 

• Two out of three of the TACS criteria, or cortical 
dysfunction alone 

LacS (lacunar stroke) 

• Causes limited motor/sensory deficits with no co tical 
dysfunction 

PoCS (posterior circulation stroke) 

• Causes a variety of clinical syndromes, including 
homonymous hemianopia, cerebellar dysfunction and 
the brainstem syndromes 


22 
















2 


Low back pain 



Low back pain is defined as posterior pain 
between the lower rib margin and the buttock 
creases; it is acute if the duration is <6 weeks, 
persistent if it lasts for 6 weeks to 3 months, and 
chronic if it is present for >3 months. In 90% of 
patients no specific underlying cause is found 
- the pain is thought to originate from muscles 
and ligaments, and is termed ‘mechanical’. 

Radicular pain ('sciatica') originates in the lower 
back and radiates down the leg in the distribu 
tion of >1 lumbosacral nerve roots (typically 
L4-S2) ± a corresponding neurological deficit 
(radiculopathy). 

A thorough history and examination, sup¬ 
plemented where necessary by spinal imaging, 
is critical to identify patients with low back pain 
who have serious and/or treatable pathology. 

Mechanical back pain 

This is by far the most common cause of low 
back pain. The pain tends to be worse during 
activity, relieved by rest, and is not associated 
with sciatica, leg weakness, sphincter distur¬ 
bance, claudication or systemic upset. An acute 
episode is often precipitated by bending, lifting 
or straining. In most cases, the pain resolves 
after a few weeks but recurrence or persistent 
low-grade symptoms are relatively common. 
Risk factors for developing chronic, disabling 
pain include depression, job dissatisfaction, 
disputed compensation claims and a history of 
other chronic pain syndromes. 

Lumbar disc herniation 

This is the most common cause of sciatica. It 
predominantly affects young and middle-aged 
adults, often following bending or lifting. Symp¬ 
toms may be exacerbated by sneezing, coughing 
or straining. The diagnosis is largely clinical and 
most cases resolve within 6 weeks. Imaging is 
needed for patients with persistent pain and/or 
neurological deficit. 


Lumbar spine stenosis 

Narrowing of the lumbar spinal canal typically 
occurs in patients >50 years as a result of 
degenerative spinal changes and may cause 
lumbosacral nerve root compression. Patients 
often have longstanding, non-specific low 
back pain before developing dull or cramp¬ 
ing discomfort in the buttocks and thighs 
precipitated by prolonged standing walking 
and eased by sitting or lying down (neurogenic 
claudication). 

Vertebral trauma and fracture 

This most commonly follows a fall, road traffic 
accident or sporting injury, but may occur 
with minimal or no trauma in patients with 
osteoporosis or spinal conditions, e.g. anky¬ 
losing spondylitis. A patient with localized low 
back pain following trauma requires imaging to 
evaluate instability and involvement of the spinal 
canal/cord. 

Spondyloarthritides (inflammatory 
back pain) 

These chronic inflammatory joint diseases include 
ankylosing spondylitis and psoriatic arthritis, and 
predominantly affect the sacroiliac joints and axial 
skeleton; they have a strong genetic association 
with HLA-B27. Ankylosing spondylitis typically 
presents in early adulthood with an insidious 
onset of progressive back pain and stiffness 
over months to years. 

Spinal tumour 

Vertebral metastases from breast, lung, prosta e 
or renal cancer are far more common than 
primary vertebral or other spinal tumours The 
spine is frequently involved in patients with 
multiple myeloma. Red flag features (see Box 
23.1) may suggest the diagnosis which is best 
confirmed with MRI. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 














Differential diagnosis 


209 


Box 23.1 Red flags for possible spinal cancer 


• New-onset pain in a patient >55 years 

• Active or previous cancer 

• Constant, unremitting or night pain 

• Focal bony tenderness 

• Unexplained weight loss 

• Fever, sweats, malaise, anorexia 


Spinal infections 

Pyogenic vertebral osteomyelitis, epidural 
abscess, ‘discitis’ or vertebral tuberculosis (TB) 
may produce severe, progressive pain, often 
with localized tenderness and reduced range of 
movement. Typical associated features include 
fever, sweats, malaise and TWBC/inflammatory 
markers Risk factors for spinal infection are 
shown in Box 23.2. MR I is sensitive for detecting 
infection and differentiating from tumour. 

Cauda equina syndrome 

Compression of the collection of nerve roots at 
the base of the spine due to central disc prolapse, 
trauma or haematoma may lead to irreversible 
neurological damage and needs emergency 


Box 23.2 Factors that increase the risk 
of spinal infection 


• Diabetes mellitus 

• General debility 

• Indwelling vascular catheters 

• IV drug abuse 

• Previous TB infection 

• Immunosuppression, e.g. HIV infection, chronic 
steroid therapy 


referral for decompression. Diagnosis is best 

confirmed by MRI. 

Other causes 

• Spondylolisthesis (forward slippage of one 
vertebra on another): may cause back and 
radicular pain, and occasionally requires 
operative decompression. 

• Pelvic pathology, e.g. prostate cancer, 
pelvic inflammatory disease. 

• Renal tract pathology, e.g. stones, cancer, 
pyelonephritis. 

• Abdominal aortic aneurysm. 

• Shingles. 

• Pregnancy. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



















LOW BACK PAIN 


Overview 


Full clinical assessment + lumbar spine examination 


1 


Bilateral lower limb neurology, sphincter 
dysfunction or iperianal sensation? 


Yes 


♦ 


Immediate 
MRI spine 




Cauda equina / other cause 


No 


Pyrexia, Tinflammatory markers or 
high clinical suspicion of infection? 


Yes MRI spine 

—-—► + -► 


blood cultures 


Spinal infection / other cause 


No 


_ Sudden-onset pain + known / 
suspected osteoporosis? 


No 


Yes 


Spinal 
X ray 

i 

i 


-► 


Vertebral fracture 


4 ‘Red flags’ for cancer (Box 23.1)? 


No 


5 Inflammatory features? 


No 


6 Radicular pain? 


No 


7 Neurogenic claudication? 


No 


Yes 


MRI spine -► 


Spinal tumour / other cause 


Yes 


Likely spondyloarthritis-► 


_ Refer to 
rheumatologist 


Yes 


-► Likely disc herniation or spinal stenosis 


Yes 


-¥■ Likely spinal stenosis-► MRI spine 


Likely mechanical back pain. Consider MRI spine if progressive / persistent symptoms 
Otherwise assess for adverse prognostic factors 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 























































LOW BACK PAIN 


Step-by-step assessment 


Clinical tool 

Examination of the lumbar spine 


Look for abnormal posture (scoliosis/loss of lordosis) 
from the back and side when the patient is standing. 
Feel for tenderness over the bony prominences and 
paraspinal muscles. 

Observe extension, flexion and lateral flexion of the 
lumbar spine (Fig. 23.1). 

Assess spinal flexion using Schober’s test: locate the 
line between the posterior superior iliac crests (L3/L4 
interspace); mark two points 10 cm above and 5 cm 
below this line. Ask the patient to bend forward as far 
as possible, with the knees extended. Lumbar flexion is 
restricted if the points separate by <5 cm. 


Test for sciatic nerve root compression (Fig. 23.2): 
with the patient supine, slowly flex the hip to 90° 
with the knee fully extended; limitation of flexion by 
pain radiating down the back of the leg to the foot 
(increased by dorsiflexing the ankle) indicates L4/L5/S1 
nerve root tension (usually due to L3/4, L4/5 or L5/S1 
lumbar disc herniation). 

Test for femoral nerve root compression (Fig. 23.3): 
with the patient prone, flex the knee to 90°; then, if 
pain-free, slowly extend the hip. Pain radiating from the 
back down the front of the leg to the knee indicates L2/ 
L3/L4 nerve root tension. 



Fig. 23.1 Movements of the 
spine. [A] Extension. [B] Flexion. 

[C] Lateral flexion. (From Ford MJ, 
Flennessey I, Japp A Introduction to 
Clinical Examination, 8th edn. 
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 
2005.) 



Fig. 23.2 Stretch test - sciatic 
nerve roots [A] Neutral; nerve roots 
slack. [B] Straight leg raising limited 
by tension of root over prolapsed 
disc. (From Ford MJ Hennessey I, 
Japp A. Introduction to Clinical 
Examination, 8th edn. Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone, 2005.) 


23 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 






































LOW BACK PAIN 


Step-by-step assessment 



Fig. 23.3 Stretch test - femoral 
nerve. j|] Patient prone and free 
from pain because femoral roots are 
slack. [B] When femoral roots are 
tightened by flexion of the knee 
+/- extension of the hip pain may 
be felt in the back. (From Ford MJ, 
Flennessey I, Japp A. Introduction to 
Clinical Examination, 8th edn. 
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 
2005.) 


Bilateral lower limb neurology, sphincter 
dysfunction or iperianal sensation? 

Ask specifically about: 

• change in urinary frequency 

• any new difficulty in starting or stopping 
micturition 

• a change in the sensation of toilet paper 
when wiping after defecation 

• episodes of urinary/faecal incontinence. 

If there is any suspicion of bowel/bladder 
dysfunction, perform a PR examination to 
assess anal tone and measure bladder volume 
immediately after voiding by bedside USS or 
catheterisation; >200 mL suggests urinary 
retention 

Enquire also about weakness or unusual 
sensations, e.g. numbness, tingling in the lower 
limbs; examine the legs carefully for reduced 
power, diminished reflexes and sensory distur¬ 
bance, and test perianal sensation 
Arrange immediate MRI spine to exclude cauda 
equina syndrome in any patient with low back 
pain (irrespective of its characteristics) associated 
with any of: 

• urinary or faecal incontinence 

• urinary retention (significant post-void 
residual urine or Tbladder volume with no 
urge) 

• altered perianal sensation/ianal tone 

• bilateral lower limb neurological signs or 
symptoms. 

Request emergency orthopaedic/neurosurgical 
review if the MRI confirms cauda equina 
compression. 


Pyrexia, Tinflammatory markers or high 
clinical suspicion of infection 


Check WBC, CRP and ESR and perform spinal 
X-rays if the patient has risk factors for spinal 
infection (see Box 23.2), localized spinal tender¬ 
ness or a history of night sweats, shivers or 
constitutional upset. Take three blood cultures 
and arrange urgent MRI spine if any of the 
following is present: 

• pyrexia >37.9°C 

• Twbc/crp/esr 

• high clinical suspicion in a patient with an 
indwelling vascular catheter, IV drug abuse 
or immunosuppression 

• X-ray features suggestive of osteomyelitis 

• A known focus of infection, e.g. abscess 
cellulitis. 


3 


Sudden-onset pain + known/suspected 
osteoporosis? 


Perform plain X-rays to look for lumbar com¬ 
pression fractures if the patient has new and 
abrupt onset of pain and known/suspected 
osteoporosis Suspect osteoporosis if: 

• long-term systemic steroids have been 
taken 

• >65 years of age with loss of height, 
kyphosis or previous radial/hip fracture. 

Seek an alternative cause if the X-ray reveals 
no fracture or one that does not correspond to 
the level of pain. Consider further investigation 
if there are any red flag features, other than 
age (see below). 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


















LOW BACK PAIN 


213 


Step by-step assessment 


4 


‘Red flags’ for cancer (Box 23.1)? 


Investigate for vertebral metastases, e.g. radio¬ 
isotope bone scan if the patient has a history 
of active or previous lung/prostate/breast/renal/ 
thyroid cancer. Perform a breast examination and 
myeloma screen, measure PSA (in males) Ca 2+ 
and ALP, and consider MRI spine in any other 
patient with ‘red flag’ features. 


Suspect lumbar spinal stenosis if the patient 
is >50 years with a slow progressive onset 
of symptoms and/or features of neurogenic 
claudication (see below). 

Consider referral for further investigation if: 

• persistent pain 

• evidence of >1 nerve root involvement 

• major disability 

• suspected lumbar spinal stenosis. 


5 


Inflammatory features? 


Check ESR/CRP and perform plain spinal 
X-rays if gradual onset of low back pain and 
stiffness. 

Refer to rheumatology for further evaluation 
of possible inflammatory back pain if there are 
X-ray features of spondylitis, e.g. squaring of the 
vertebral bodies/sacroiliitis or >1 of the following: 

• morning stiffness lasting >30 minutes 

• improvement of symptoms with exercise 
but not rest 

• nocturnal back pain that arises in the 
second half of the night 

• radiation of pain into the buttocks 

• restricted lumbar spine movements 

• sacroiliac tenderness 

• TESR/CRP with no alternative explanation. 


6 


Radicular pain? 


Pain is ‘radicular’ if it radiates to the lower limb 
beyond the knee with any of: 

• dermatomal distribution (see Fig. 22.1 , 

p. 200) 

• evidence of radiculopathy 

• positive sciatic or femoral stretch test 
(Figs 23.2 and 23.3). 

Suspect lumbar disc herniation in acute-onset 
radicular pain, especially if the nerve stretch test 
is positive. In the absence of red flags or other 
concerning features, reassess after 6-12 weeks 
of analgesia ± physiotherapy. 


7 


Neurogenic claudication? 


Consider neurogenic claudication if low back 
pain is accompanied by bilateral thigh or leg 
discomfort, e.g. burning, cramping, tingling, that 
arises during walking or on standing and is rapidly 
relieved by sitting, lying down or bending forward. 

Evaluate first for vascular claudication if the 
patient has a history of atherosclerotic disease, 
>1 vascular risk factor, e.g. diabetes mellitus, 
smoking, TBP, Tcholesterol or signs of peripheral 
arterial disease, e.g. diminished pulses, femoral 
bruit, trophic skin changes Check the ankle: 
brachial pressure index (ABPI) and request a 
vascular opinion if <1.0. 

If neurogenic claudication is still suspected, 
consider MRI spine to confirm the presence of 
lumbar spinal stenosis, especially if symptoms 
are disabling. 


Likely mechanical back pain. 
Consider MRI spine if progressive/ 
persistent symptoms 


Refer to orthopaedics if neurological dysfunction 
or spinal deformity. In the absence of neurological, 
structural, infective, red flag or radicular features, 
provide reassurance and analgesia, recommend 
that the patient stays active and reassess after a 
period of 6-12 weeks. If pain persists, look for 
features of depression and explore other potential 
psychosocial factors. Spinal imaging is unlikely 
to be helpful but seek specialist input if there are 
persistent or progressive disabling symptoms. 


23 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
















A Mobility problems: falls 
and immobility 


Patients may present with falls, difficulty 
mobilizing or complete immobility. Younger 
patients can usually be rapidly categorized 
into an underlying aetiology, but evaluation 
of elderly patients is more complex. Normal 
physiological changes of ageing - increased body 
sway, reduced muscle bulk (sarcopenia) and 
impaired reaction time - increase the likelihood of 
mobili y problems. Moreover, mobility problems 
may be self-reinforcing, as reduced activity leads 
to loss of muscle function and confidence. A 
thorough, systematic approach is essential to 
identify adverse consequences of immobility, 
serious underlying pathology and potentially 
reversible contributing factors. 

Accidental trip 

Some falls are the unavoidable consequence of 
a trip or stumble. In the absence of significant 
injury, recurrent mobility problems or other 
concerns these patients do not require detailed 
assessment. However, many elderly patients 
exhibit post hoc rationalization of their fall (‘I must 
have tripped on the carpet’), so falls should only 
be classified as accidental if there is unequivocal 
evidence for this. 

‘Secondary’ mobility presentations 

Immobility and instability may occur as a con¬ 
sequence of other specific problems such as 


dizziness, joint pains or focal limb weakness. In 
these cases, assessment should focus, initially, 
on the underlying primary problem to determine 
the cause. Some patients with apparent falls may 
actually be experiencing blackouts and, again, 
this necessitates a different diagnostic approach. 

Acute illness or drug reaction 

In elderly/frail patients, a sudden decline in 
mobility (acute fall, inability to mobilize) may be 
the principal manifestation of any acute medical, 
surgical or psychiatric illness or a side-effect of 
certain medications (Box 24.1). In those with 
chronic underlying mobility problems, a relatively 
minor insult may lead to a major deterioration 
in mobility. 

Multifactorial mobility problems 

In patients with recurrent falls or other chronic 
mobility problems, there is often no single 
identifiable cause but rather multiple contributing 
factors, e.g. muscle weakness, balance disorder, 
poypharmacy, cognitive impairment, arthritis, 
Ivisual acuity, hearing loss. A comprehensive 
and multidimensional approach to assessment 
is essential. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 











MOBILITY PROBLEMS: FALLS AND IMMOBILITY 


Differential diagnosis 


215 


Box 24.1 Drugs associated with increased risk of falls 


• Alcohol 

• Anticonvulsants 

• Antidepressants 

• Antihypertensives 

• Antipsychotics 


• Benzodiazepines 

• Diuretics 

• Digoxin 

• Opioids 

• Diabetes medications (oral hypoglycaemics and insulin) 


A 

Clinical tool 

How to perforin a gait assessment 


• Ask patient to stand from sitting position 

disease, pain); short, shuffling steps (Parkinson's 

Look for: need for assistance; necessary use of 

disease 1 diffuse cerebrovascular disease); high- 

upper limbs 

stepping gait (foot-drop, sensory ataxia); broad- 

• Ask patient to continue standing 

based/unsteady gait (cerebellar lesion, normal 

Ask about: light-headedness/sensation of spinning or 

pressure hydrocephalus) 


movement 

• Ask the patient to walk for a longer distance 

Look for: ability to continue standing safely/ 

Ask about: chest pain, calf pain, breathlessness, 

unsteadiness/stooped posture 

fatigue 

• Ask patient to move feet together - ensure he/she is 

Look for: tRR, laboured breathing, need 

standing close by 

to stop 

Look for: increasing unsteadiness 

• Repeat, if necessary, after correction of any reversible 

• Ask patient to close eyes (Romberg’s test) 

factors, e.g. treatment of acute illness, effective pain 

Look for: increasing unsteadiness (be ready to 
catch patient) 

control, rehydration, removal of offending drug 

• Ask patient to open eyes, walk 3 metres, then turn 


around and walk back, using an aid if required 


Look for: overall safety and stability; unilateral gait 
abnormality (stroke, peripheral nerve lesion, joint 


1 0ther features of Parkinsonian gait include reduced arm-swing, stooped postur and, sometimes, difficulty in starting and stopping 

('festinant' gait) 



downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
















MOBILITY PROBLEMS: FALLS AND IMMOBILITY 


Mobility problems: overview 


Full clinical assessment + collateral history 


1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 


7 


8 


9 


10 


Significant injuries or other 

Yes 

sequelae of fall / immobility? 






Evaluate and treat: fractures / wounds / head injury 
/ pain / hypothermia / rhabdomyolysis / dehydration 

i 

i 


Fall related to stumble / trip 

Yes 

with none of features in Box 24.3? 


| No 



Primary prob em = focal limb weakness 

Yes 

/ blackout / dizziness / acute joint pain? 


| No 

Yes 

Abrupt decline in mobility? 


No .. 



Accidental trip 


^Mobility secondary _ _ Presentation-specific 
to specific cause assessment (see text) 


Likely acute illness / Identify and treat 

new drug (see text) 

i 

i 


Assess gait (Box 24.4), cognition and visual acuity 


Gait or neurological abnormality? 

Yes 


| No* 

Yes 

On >3 drugs / high-risk drug (Box 24.1)? 


| No* 



See Gait abnormalities 


Review medications; consider trial 
discontinuation /l dose 



* Or problem reviewed / dealt with 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

















































MOBILITY PROBLEMS: FALLS AND IMMOBILITY 


Mobility problems: step-by-step assessment 


Significant injuries or other sequelae of 
fall/immobility? 

In all patients who have fallen (or who have been 
found on the floor), perform a rapid but thorough 
survey of the entire body for injuries. Fractures, 
lacerations or bruising may be not immediately 
apparent, and the cognitively impaired patient 
may not bring them to your attention. Assess the 
perfusion and function of any limb with bruising, 
deformity, pain or swelling and consider the need 
for X-rays. Pain will compound any existing mobility 
problems - ensure it is adequately treated. If there 
is a history of head injury, arrange neuroimaging if 
any of the features in Box 24.2 is present. 

In patients with a prolonged period of immobil¬ 
ity, e.g. lying on the floor or confined to bed, 
check temperature to exclude hypothermia, look 
for clinical/biochemical evidence of dehydration 
and examine the heels and sacrum for pressure 
sores. Consider aspiration/hypostatic pneumonia 
in patients with hypoxia, lung crackles or CXR 
changes. If there has been significant soft tissue 
pressure damage or any prolonged time on the 
floor, check CK and urinary myoglobin (sug¬ 
gested by haematuria on urinalysis with no red 
cells on microscopy) to exclude rhabdomyolysis 
and be vigilant for compartment syndrome (Box 
21.3, p. 191). 


Fall related to stumble/trip with none of 
features in Box 24.3? 

Take care in making this diagnosis - a simple trip 
on a loose carpet tile at walking pace is usually 


Box 24.2 Indications for early neuroimaging in 
patients with head injury 


Immediate CT brain 

• iGCS <12 or persistently <15 

• Focal neurological signs 

• Persistent headache or vomiting 

• Features of basal skull fracture 

• Coagulopathy or anticoagulation 

CT brain within 8 hours 

• Seizure 

• >65 years + episode of loss of consciousness 

• Retrograde amnesia 

• Evidence of skull fracture 


’Based on SIGN guideline 110. 


not ‘normal’ and the visual impairment that led 
to the trip or the poor balance that turned it into 
an injurious fall might be reversible. On the other 
hand, exhaustive assessment is inappropriate 
in patients with a genuinely accidental fall and 
no underlying mobility problems. Have a low 
threshold for further evaluation if any of the 
features in Box 24.3 is present or events leading 
up to the fall are unclear. 


3 


Primary problem = focal limb weakness/ 
blackout/dizziness/acute joint pain? 


If you identify new limb weakness on examination, 
assess as described in Chapter 22. 

If mobility problems are consequent on diz¬ 
ziness, evaluate firstly for symptomatic postural 
hypotension: a fall of >20 mmHg in systolic BP 
or >10 mmHg in diastolic BP within 3 minutes 
of changing from a lying to standing position, 
accompanied by a feeling of light headedness/ 
pre-syncope. If this is detected, search for 
underlying causes, e.g. antihypertensives, 
dehydration, autonomic neuropathy. Otherwise, 
assess as in Chapter 10, but complete a full 
mobility assessment, especially if no specific 
disorder is identified. 

Consider whether an apparent fall could have 
been a blackout. Beware of accepting rationaliza¬ 
tions for the event (‘I must have tripped’) and 
make every attempt to obtain an eyewitness 
account of the current episode or previous ones. 
If patients cannot recall how they came to be 
lying on the ground, assess, in the first instance, 
as per transient loss of consciousness (see Ch. 
31). Also suspect transient loss of consciousness 
if the patient was witnessed as having a period of 
unresponsiveness, sustained facial injuries during 
the fall (most conscious patients can protect 
the face) or experienced palpitation, chest pain, 
breathlessness or a pre-syncopal prodrome prior 


24 


Box 24.3 Features not consistent with a diag¬ 
nosis of simple accidental trip 


• Recurrent or multiple falls 

• Recent decline in mobility or functional status 

• Inability to get up from the ground 

• Implausible mechanism for fall 

• Witnessed period of unresponsiveness 

• Inability to recall landing on ground 

• Facial injuries 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





















MOBILITY PROBLEMS: FALLS AND IMMOBILITY 


Mobility problems: step-by-step assessment 


to ‘falling’. Have a lower threshold for further 
evaluation of possible syncope in patients with 
ECG abnormalities (see Box 31 .3, p. 273) or a 
history of major cardiac disease. 

If mobility problems are secondary to an 
acutely painful joint, assess as in Chapter 20. 


4 


Abrupt decline in mobility? 


An abrupt decline in mobility (acute fall, new 
onset of recurrent falls or being ‘off legs’) is 
one of the classical atypical presentations of 
acute illness in the elderly. Characteristic signs/ 
symptoms of the specific precipitant may be 
absent and ‘screening’ investigations (Box 24.4) 
are often required to uncover the problem or 
identify a focus for further assessment. 

Review all new drugs (including over-the- 
counter ones) started within the previous weeks 
and consider trial discontinuation of any high- 
risk agents (see Box 24.1). If significant loss of 
mobility was preceded by a fall, consider the 
possibility of fracture or head injury - ensure 
pain is adequately treated. 

Weight loss, muscle wasting, hypoalbumi- 
naemia and chronic anaemia may suggest a 
progressive disorder ‘coming to a head’. Suspect 
significant acute illness in patients whose baseline 
mobility is relatively normal. Once this has been 
addressed, complete a full assessment to identify 
underlying mobility problems and reversible risk 
factors for falling. 

In patients with a background of progressive 
mobility decline/deteriorating functional status/ 
general frailty, the acute precipitant may be minor 
- do not over-emphasize it in comparison with 
the underlying contributory factors. 


Box 24.4 Screening investigations to identify 
acute illness in elderly patients 


• Capillary BG 

• PR examination 

• Urine dipstick and MSU/CSU (avoid diagnosing a 
urinary tract infection purely on the basis of abnormal 
dipstick results) 

• Blood tests - FBC, U+E, LFTs, glucose, CRP 
(minimum) 

• CXR 


5 


Gait or neurological abnormality? 


Assessment of walking pattern is key to under¬ 
standing mobility problems. It is a fundamental 
element of the neurological examination and can 
reveal abnormalities not elicited on gross testing 
of individual modalities. It may also unmask 
impaired effort tolerance due to cardiorespiratory 
or lower limb disease. Finally, the gait assessment 
Is an opportunity to assess falls risk, even in the 
absence of specific findings. Check that patients 
are safe to mobilize, equip them with their normal 
walking aid and follow the steps in Clinical tool: 
Assessment of gait. Go to ‘Gait abnormalities’ 
(p. 220) if any abnormalities are detected. 


6 


On >3 drugs/high-risk drug (Box 24.1)? 


Medications are one of the most readily modifi¬ 
able of all factors influencing mobility problems 
but indiscriminate changes may do more harm 
than good. Individual medications that increase 
the risk of falling are listed in Box 24.1 . Polyp¬ 
harmacy (>5 regular medications) is a risk factor 
for falls. Review the indications for all drugs: 
are they still required? Look for opportunities to 
rationalize treatment, consider alternatives and 
consider decreasing the dose. 

A gradual approach will allow the impact of 
individual changes to be assessed and is essential 
with psychotropic medication where abrupt with¬ 
drawal may be worse than the toxic syndrome. 
Explore a possible contribution from alcohol in 
all cases - in patients with underlying mobility/ 
balance problems it may critically impair stability, 
even when consumed within recommended limits. 


7 


Cognitive impairment/confusion? 


Acute delirium is a common cause of reduced 
mobility, and may not be readily apparent if it is 
hypoactive or superimposed on chronic impair¬ 
ment. Vigilance and collateral history are essential 
counterparts to objective measures of cognitive 
function; an Abbreviated Mental Test score of 
6/10 is difficult to interpret without knowledge of 
baseline ability. Chronic cognitive impairment is 
also a risk factor for falls, but difficult to amelio¬ 
rate. Consider silent precipitants of wandering/ 
getting out of bed, such as urinary urgency 
or nicotine withdrawal. Further assessment of 
confusion is detailed in Chapter 8. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
















MOBILITY PROBLEMS: FALLS AND IMMOBILITY 


Mobility problems: step by-step assessment 


8 


Sensory impairment? 


Visual impairment increases the risk of falls and 
may be reversible, e.g. refractory errors, cataracts 
Screen for -Ivisual acuity. If detected, refer to 
an ophthalmologist (or an optician if a refractory 
error is suspected). Hearing loss may also 
contribute to instability and increased risk of 
falling, particularly in combination with some of 
the other risk factors. 


9 


High fracture risk? 


Fractures, especially of the hip, are a devastating 
consequence of falls and selected patients may 
benefit from bone protection. This is a contro¬ 
versial area and specific indications change, 
but treatment, e.g. bisphosphonates, should 
be considered in patients with previous fragility 


fractures or a bone mineral density T-score of 
-2 5 or less and in those taking long-term or 
frequent courses of systemic steroids. In other 
cases, consider using the Q-fracture risk assess¬ 
ment tool, http://qfracture.org. 


10 


Multifactorial mobility problem: arrange 
multidisciplinary team assessment 


All patients with recurrent falls or ^mobility should 
be referred to physiotherapy/occupational therapy 
for assessment of functional ability, environmental 
contributors to the presentation, and scope for 
benefit from measures such as walking aids/ 
strength and balance training/home alarms. 
In patients with ongoing problems, consider 
referral to day hospital or a specialist falls clinic 
for comprehensive assessment. 


24 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










MOBILITY PROBLEMS: FALLS AND IMMOBILITY 


Gait abnormalities: overview 


Unable to stand up unaided? 

Yes 

-► 

Consider focal weakness / proximal 
myopathy / pain / acute illness 


No 



Un 

steady with eyes open? 

Yes 

-► 

Consider postural hypotension / 
cerebellar ataxia / vertigo 


No 


3 


Positive Romberg test? 


Yes 


♦ 


Sensory ataxia 




Seek underlying 
cause 


No 


4 


5 


6 



Refer to 

Elderly Medicine 


Consider cerebellar lesion / cerebrovascular 
disease / apraxia / peripheral neuropathy / 
normal pressure hydrocephalus 


Consider angina / dyspnoea (Ch. 12) / 
claudication 


Likely Parkinson’s 
disease 


Return to Mobility Problems: Overview (Step 6) 


1 Unable to stand up unaided? 

Lower limb weakness may limit the ability to rise 
from a chair or necessitate use of the chair arms 
or pulling on nearby furniture. Systemic illness, 
toxic insults or metabolic derangement may cause 
mild generalized weakness. If weakness is per¬ 
sistent, asymmetrical or associated with wasting/ 
neurological abnormalities, see Chapter 22. 


2 


Unsteady with eyes open? 


Check lying/standing BP if the patient feels faint 
or light-headed. Consider vertigo if the patient 
has a sensation of spinning or movement. 
Observe standing posture, identify reduction in 
joint function, and evaluate pain. If patients can 
remain standing without assistance, ask them 
to move their feet close together - inability 
to do so indicates significant ataxia. Look for 


associated features of cerebellar disease, e.g. 
intention tremor, dysdiadochokinesis dysmetria 
(past-pointing), dysarthria, nystagmus. 


3 


Positive Romberg test? 


A marked increase in unsteadiness after eye 
closing is a positive test, suggesting a sensory 
(proprioceptive or vestibular) rather than cer¬ 
ebellar cause of ataxia. Reduction in sensation 
may be a normal part of ageing, e.g. reduced 
vibration sense in the feet is common and of 
limited significance in the older patient. Examine 
the patient during walking for an unsteady, 
ataxic or ‘lead boot’ gait. The list of possible 
causes of peripheral neuropathy is vast but 
screen routinely for diabetes mellitus alcohol 
excess, liver disease, malnutrition (check vitamin 
B 12 ) or iatrogenic causes, e.g. anticonvulsants, 
chemotherapy. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

















































MOBILITY PROBLEMS: FALLS AND IMMOBILITY 


Gait abnormalities: step-by-step assessment 


4 


Features of Parkinsonism? 


Look for the typical features of Parkinson’s 
disease: 

• tremor: coarse, slow (5 Hz) and usually 
asymmetrical; present at rest, absent 
during sleep; decreased by volunta y 
movement; increased by emotion; 
adduction-abduction of the thumb with 
flexion-extension of the fingers (‘pill-rolling’) 

• Ttone: ‘lead-pipe’ rigidity or (in the 
presence of tremor) ‘cog-wheel’ with a jerky 
feel 

• bradykinesia: slow initiation of 
movement, ispeed of fine movements, 
expressionless face 

• gait: delayed initiation, -farm swing, 
stooped posture, short, shuffling steps, 
difficulty turning. 

The presence of these features makes idi¬ 
opathic Parkinson’s disease (PD) more likely, but 
Parkinsonism has other causes: most commonly, 
diffuse cerebrovascular disease. The classical 
description of vascular Parkinsonism is of signs 
of PD below the waist, with relative sparing of 
the arms. 

New presentations or progression of PD 
are usually assessed in an outpatient setting. 
Mobility-related admissions in patients with 
PD are more likely to be connected with a 
superimposed acute illness or a medication 
problem. Make certain that hospitalized patients 
with PD receive their medication at the correct 
dose and time to ensure that their mobility does 
not deteriorate further. 


5 


Gait abnormality? 


Gait screening is sensitive for neuromotor, 
sensory and musculoskeletal abnormalities in the 
lower limbs because walking is a complex task in 
comparison with the tests of neurological function 
used in the standard screening examination. 


The gaits associated with Parkinsonism and 
sensory ataxia are described above. Suspect 
cerebellar ataxia if the gait is unsteady and 
broad-based with an inability to heel-toe walk 
(as if inebriated with alcohol). A hemiplegic gait is 
usually obvious and will be associated with focal 
neurological signs. Bilateral lower limb proximal 
muscle weakness may produce a ‘waddling’ gait. 

Pain can limit exertion or alter gait, leading to 
a decrease in function or an increased risk of 
falling. The patient will typically place the foot 
of the affected side delicately on the floor for 
as little time as possible to avoid the pain of 
weight-bearing (‘antalgic’ gait). Osteoarthritis is 
frequently responsible but is usually chronic and 
slowly progressive, and thus unlikely to lead to 
hospital admission without additional factors. 
Acutely painful joints require careful assessment. 

Consider gait apraxia if no specific neurological 
abnormality or gait pattern is noted but the gait 
is none the less abnormal. Apraxia, the inability 
to conduct learned, purposeful movements 
properly (in the absence of a focal insult), is a 
result of general or frontal cerebral insults such 
as dementia, cerebrovascular disease, normal 
pressure hydrocephalus, sedation or metabolic 
derangement. 

Psychological causes of reduced mobility 
(especially the fear of falling) can also reduce 
mobil ty and increase the risk of falls, and may 
only be elicited by asking the patient to mobilize 
greater distances. 


6 


Reduced exercise tolerance? 


Observe for/ask about exertional dyspnoea, 
chest discomfort and claudication. The latter may 
be due to peripheral vascular disease (dimin¬ 
ished pulses, skin changes, vascular disease 
elsewhere) but consider neurogenic claudication 
secondary to spinal stenosis, especially if the 
discomfort responds to postural change, e.g. 
bending over, sitting down, more quickly than 
standing still. 


24 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 











Nausea and vomiting 



Nausea is the unpleasant sensation of being 
about to vomit. Vomiting is the forceful expul¬ 
sion of gastric contents often preceded by 
nausea. Vomiting should be differentiated from 
regurgitation, where there is appearance of gastric 
contents without any effort. The assessment of 
acute (<10 days) nausea and vomiting (N&V) differs 
from chronic presentations reflecting a different 
range of likely diagnoses. 

This chapter focuses on N&V as a principal 
presenting complaint. Refer to the relevant 
chapter if a more specific clinical feature is 
present, e.g. jaundice, headache, chest pain. 
See Chapter 15 if the vomitus comprises fresh 
or altered blood. 


Infection 

Gastroenteritis is by far the most common cause 
of acute N&V. It may affect any age group but 
has a higher incidence in children, young adults 
and the elderly. The aetiology is usually viral, 
e.g. norovirus, rotavirus, adenovirus. Bacterial 
pathogens tend to come from poorly prepared/ 
cooked foodstuffs, and can include Bacillus 
cereus and Staphylococcus aureus. There may 
be known contacts with similar symptoms, or 
a history of travel, eating out or eating unusual 
foods in recent days. Vomiting mediated by 
a bacterial toxin tends to develop within 1-6 
hours. Accompanying features may include fever, 
abdominal cramping and diarrhoea. 

Other infections, e g. urinary tract infection, 
meningitis, hepatitis or otitis media may also 
cause N&V, part cularly in more vulnerable groups 
such as children and the elderly. However, other 
clinical features usually predominate. 


Gl obstruction 

Mechanical obstruction of the Gl tract, e g. due 
to tumour, adhesions or incarcerated hernia, 
may cause vomiting, usually accompanied by 


colicky abdominal pain (see Ch. 4) and abso¬ 
lute constipation +/- abdominal distension. The 
characteristics of the vomitus may suggest the 
location of obstruction: gastric juices - gastric 
outlet obstruction; bilious material - small bowel 
obstruction; feculent material - distal obstruction 
(or coloenteric/cologastric fistula). 

Other Gl tract disease 

Peptic ulcer disease may present with N&V, 
typically associated with epigastric discomfort or 
a history of dyspeptic symptoms. Gastroparesis 
results in vomiting after food ingestion due to 
delayed gastric emptying; suspect this in patients 
with poorly controlled diabetes/multiple diabetes- 
related complications, scleroderma or previous 
gastric surgery. N&V may be a prominent feature 
of acute inflammatory abdominal pathology, e.g. 
acute pancreatitis/appendicitis/cholecystitis, but 
abdominal pain is almost always the principal 
complaint (Ch. 4). Severe constipation may lead 
to N&V, particularly in frail elderly patients. 


Medications 

Numerous medications or toxins can result in 
nausea or vomiting; some of the more common 
culprits are listed in Box 25.1 Alcohol misuse is 
a very frequent cause of both acute and chronic 
N&V. Heavy cannabis use can result in chronic 
vomiting, which may be cyclical, and tends to 
be alleviated by baths and showers. 


Metabolic disturbance 

Chronic renal failure with uraemia tends to 
present non-specifically and nausea +/- vomiting 
is often a prominent feature. Conversely, severe 
N&V is an important cause of acute kidney injury 
due to hypovolaemia. The assessment of renal 
failure is discussed on page 230 
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and, to a lesser 
extent, hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state (HHS), 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 












NAUSEA AND VOMITING 


Differential diagnosis 


223 


Box 25.1 Common toxic/therapeutic causes of 
nausea and vomiting 

Alcohol 

Digoxin 

Anti-arrhythmics 

NSAIDs 

Anticonvulsants 

Oestrogen and progestogen- 


containing drugs 

Antibiotics (esp. 

Oestrogen and progestogen- 

erythromycin) 

containing drugs 

Anti-Parkinsonian 

Opioids 

treatments 


Cannabinoids 

Psychotropic meds 

Chemotherapy agents 

Theophylline 


may present with N&V. Suggestive features 
include a history of polyuria and/or polydipsia 
and a background of diabetes (particularly type 1). 

N&V may be the main presenting symptom in 
hypercalcaemia, especially since other features 
tend to be non-specific. Underlying causes are 
discussed on page 297. 

Gl upset, including N&V is also common in 
adrenal insufficiency, including acute adrenal 
crisis. Hypotension and illness severity are usually 
disproportionate to the degree of vomiting. Other 
suggestive features are shown in Box 25.2. 

CNS causes 

Raised intracranial pressure may produce 
vomiting, often without nausea. When chronic, 
e.g. space occupying lesion, vomiting classically 
occurs shortly after wakening and is associated 
with headache (worse on lying, bending or 
straining) and papilloedema. In acute causes, 
e.g. intracerebral haemorrhage, there may be 
sudden onset headache initially followed by 
a progressive decline in GCS. Nausea, with 
or without vomiting, occurs during episodes 
of migraine in -80% of patients and is often 
severe; however headache +/- aura is usually 
the dominant symptom (Ch. 19). 


Box 25.2 Clinical / biochemical features often 
present in patients with adrenal insufficiency 


Symptoms (often insidious) 

• Lethargy, fatigue 

• Anorexia, weight loss 

• Nausea and vomiting 

• Postural hypotension 

Physical signs 

• Pigmentation (skin, mucous membranes) 

• Vitiligo 

• Postural hypotension 

Blood 

• Hyponatraemia 

• Hyperkalaemia 

• Hypoglycaemia (fasting or spontaneous) 

• Normal-anion gap metabolic acidosis (mild) 

Other 

• History of other autoimmune disorders 


N&V accompanied by vertigo suggests ves¬ 
tibular or brainstem pathology (Ch. 10). Vomiting 
may also occur in CNS infection, e.g. meningitis 
but usually not as the main presenting feature. 

Other causes 

Always consider pregnancy in women of child¬ 
bearing age with new-onset nausea +/- vomiting. 
Symptoms are not always confined to morning 
and may occur at any time of the day. In eating 
disorders, recurrent vomiting may be concealed 
by the patient and brought to light by a family 
member. There is frequently a history of psy¬ 
chiatric disorder, deliberate self harm, laxative 
abuse or evidence of altered body image. 

Functional vomiting is a diagnosis of exclu¬ 
sion; symptoms are typically worse after eating 
with vomiting of undigested or chewed food. 
There may also be a history of early satiety and 
epigastric fullness. 


25 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

















NAUSEA AND VOMITING 


Acute nausea and vomiting: overview 



downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



































































NAUSEA AND VOMITING 


225 


Acute nausea and vomiting: step-by-step assessment 


Assess illness severity and resuscitation 
requirements 

Step 1 Are there features of shock? 

Look for THR, IBP (a late sign) or evidence of 
tissue hypoperfusion (see Box 30.1, p 267). 
If present, reassess following aggressive IV 
fluid resuscitation and monitor urine output 
(consider urinary catheterization if necessary). 
Exclude diabetic ketoacidosis (see Clinical tool, 
p. 299) if TCBG, known type 1 diabetes or recent 
polydipsia/polyuria. Suspect adrenal insufficiency 
in patients with a history of Addison’s disease (or 
other autoimmune disease), chronic corticosteroid 
use or suggestive clinical features (Box 25.2); 
also consider whenever the severity of shock 
appears disproportionate to fluid losses: take 
blood for random cortisol and treat immediately 
with intravenous hydrocortisone. 

Step 2 Is there acute renal impairment? 

Hypovolaemia may result in severe ‘pre-renal’ acute 
kidney injury (AKI), especially if compounded by 
antihypertensive or nephrotoxic medication such 
as diuretics, ACE inhibitors or NSAIDs. Patients 
with AKI due to volume depletion require IV 
rehydration with close monitoring of fluid balance, 
urine output and U+E. However, consider other 
potential drivers of both AKI and nausea/ 
vomiting, (e.g. sepsis, drug toxicity) in patients 
without clinical evidence of hypovolaemia. 
Consider renal failure as the cause of N&V in 
patients with severe impairment. See page 230 
for further assessment of renal failure. 

Step 3 Does the patient otherwise require IV fluids/ 
hospital admission? 

Patients with clinical evidence of dehydration 
(thirst, dry mucous membranes, iskin turgor) 
and ongoing vomiting, require IV hydration. 


Other features that may indicate a need for 
hospital admission include 

• evidence of sepsis (Ch. 1 4) 

• acute kidney injury 

• frail, elderly or immunocompromised patient 

• significant comorbidity, e.g. heart/renal/ 
hepatic failure. 


2 


Pregnancy possible? 


Ask about last menstrual period and formally 
test for pregnancy in any women of reproductive 
age present ng with N&V. 


3 


Associated features suggest a diagnosis? 


Perform an AXR if N&V is accompanied by 
absent bowel movements and abdominal pain 
or distension. Consider acute gastritis peptic 
ulcer disease or pancreatitis if there is severe 
upper abdominal pain. In either case, assess 
as per Chapter 4. 

Headache may occur secondary to dehydra¬ 
tion in acute vomiting but consider the possibility 
of serious CNS pathology. Assess as per Chapter 
18 if headache is a prominent feature, especially 
if the onset is acute or there are any other 
concerning features, e.g. recent head injury, 
anticoagulant therapy, meningism, fever, reduced 
GCS, papilloedema or focal neurology. 

Acute onset of N&V accompanied by vertigo 
(dizziness with an illusion of movement, e.g. 
spinning) is likely to represent either vest bular 
neuronitis or acute brainstem pathology such 
as infarction or haemorrhage; assess as per 
Chapter 10. 

Suspect ACS and assess as per Chapter 6 if 
N&V occurs with chest, jaw, neck or arm pain. 


25 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 











NAUSEA AND VOMITING 


Acute nausea and vomiting: step-by-step assessment 


4 


Metabolic abnormality? 


Test for diabetes and exclude ketoacidosis in 
any patient without a pre-existing diagnosis who 
has TCBG lab glucose (p. 299). Consider HHS 
in patients with known diabetes and markedly 
TBG (p. 299). 

Assess patients with renal failure as described 
on page 230. 

If TCa 2+ (corrected for albumin), assess further 
as described on page 297 Reassess symptoms 
after rehydration and other corrective treatment; 
remember that N&V may be due to the underlying 
cause, e.g. malignancy rather than TCa 2+ per se. 

Consider adrenal insufficiency in patients with 
i Na + /TK + o -Iblood glucose, especially if there 
are suggestive clinical features (Box 25.2). If 
suspected, check a morning cortisol level +/- 
ACTH stimulation test (‘Short Synacthen Test’). 


Associated diarrhoea, infectious contacts 
or ingestion of ‘suspicious foodstuffs ? 

Suspect acute gastroenteritis if any of these 
features are present. Most cases are self-limiting 


viral or toxin-mediated infections and do not 
require further investigation or antimicrobial 
treatment. However, consider AXR (to exclude 
colonic dilatation) and surgical review if there 
are concerning features such as bloody diar¬ 
rhoea, abdominal pain or an excessive systemic 
inflammatory response. Re-evaluate if symptoms 
persist >10 days. 


6 


Likely drug or toxic culprit? 

(see Box 25.1) 


Always ask about recent changes to drugs or 
dosages - including over-the-counter medi¬ 
cines - and check what the patient is actually 
taking. Enquire about recreational drug use and 
alcohol intake. In drugs with a narrow therapeutic 
window, e.g. digoxin or some anticonvulsants, 
check serum levels to exclude toxicity. Resolution 
of symptoms with drug discontinuation (where 
possible) confirms the diagnosis. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 











NAUSEA AND VOMITING 


Acute nausea and vomiting: step by-step assessment 


7 


Acutely unwell or suspicion of 
atypical presentation? 


Consider non-specific presentation of major 
pathology in patients who appear seriously 
unwell, (e.g. autonomic upset, physiological 
derangement). Be mindful of atypical presenta¬ 
tions in frail elderly patients or those with cogni¬ 
tive impairment, immunocompromise (including 
chronic corticosteroid treatment) or longstanding 
diabetes. Perform an ECG to look for evidence of 
myocardial infarction/ischaemia (p. 51) and check 
blood chemistry (including CRP and amylase) and 
urinalysis. Undertake a septic screen (p. 142) if 
there is fever or Tinflammatory markers. Have 


a low threshold for AXR +/- further abdominal 
imaging, e.g. CT or USS. Severe constipation 
may lead to N&V in immobile, frail or elderly 
patients so enquire about bowel movements 
and consider PR exam +/- AXR. 


8 


Probable Gl infection 


In the absence of alternative pathology, Gl 
infection is the most likely cause; it is almost 
always self-limiting so further investigation 
is usually not required. Re-evaluate if the 
patient is unwell or deteriorating. Proceed to 
assessment of chronic N&V symptoms persist 
for >10 days. 


25 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 









NAUSEA AND VOMITING 


Chronic nausea and vomiting: overview 


Full clinical assessment, FBC, U&E, LFT, glucose, ca cium 



No 


- - +■ 


Confirm diagnosis 


- - +■ 


Upper Gl cancer / 
peptic ulcer / gastritis 


Malignancy / other 
diagnosis 


Likely drug / toxic culprit? (see Box 25.1) 


Yes 


Trial 


discontinuation 


No 


Drug-induced N&V 



Major abnormality on examination/ 
routine bloods? 

Screen patients with persistent or recurrent 
N&V for the following abnormalities to narrow 
the differential diagnosis. 

Deranged LFTs+/-jaundice 

If known chronic liver disease assess as per 
page 179. Otherwise, arrange urgent abdominal 


USS, review alcohol intake/all recent medications 
and assess further as described in Chapter 19 
but continue to look for alternative causes of N&V 
if only minor LFT derangement without jaundice. 

Palpable abdominal or pelvic mass 

Arrange urgent imaging to exclude underlying 
malignancy. Consider USS initially, particularly 
for pelvic masses or hepatomegaly but arrange 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





















































NAUSEA AND VOMITING 


229 


Chronic nausea and vomiting: step-by-step assessment 


CT abdomen/pelvis if no cause is found (or to 
further characterize/stage abnormalities). 

Renal failure 

Severe renal failure frequently presents non 
specifically with nausea +/- vomiting, lethargy, 
anorexia. Distinguish this from ‘pre-renal’ renal 
impairment due to protracted vomiting and 
assess for an underlying aetiology (p. 230). 

Anaemia 

Arrange urgent upper Gl endoscopy in any 
patient with persistent N&V and evidence of 
iron deficiency anaemia. In patients without 
iron-deficiency, continue anaemia work-up 
but consider other causes of N&V if no clear 
explanation identified. 

Hypercalcaemia 

Assess as described on page 297. If mildly TCa 2+ 
continue to evaluate for other causes of N&V. 


2 


Associated upper Gl symptoms? 


Associated symptoms of dysphagia, early satiety, 
epigastric discomfort or dyspepsia suggest upper 
Gl tract pathology such as oesophageal/gastric 
cancer; peptic ulcer disease or gastritis. Ask about 
NSAID use/alcohol intake and arrange upper Gl 
endoscopy if any of these are present or if vomit¬ 
ing persists for >4 weeks (urgently if weight loss, 
dysphagia or new onset symptoms in patient aged 
>50 years). Refer for formal Gl review if persistent 
symptoms with no cause identified on endoscopy 


3 


Weight loss/anorexia? 


Investigate for underlying malignancy if N&V is 
accompanied by significant weight loss, (e.g. 
>5% of body weight in <12 months) +/- anorexia, 
especially in patients with relatively recent onset 
of symptoms. Arrange upper Gl endoscopy if 
not already performed and, if normal, request CT 
abdomen/pelvis If no cause identified, continue 
to assess as below. Consider chronic presenta¬ 
tion of adrenal insufficiency if there are other 
suggestive clinical features (Box 25.2). 


4 


Likely drug/toxic culprit? 


Ask about all medications (including over 
the counter), particularly those in Box 25.2; 


suspect a toxic aetiology if there is a clear 
temporal relationship between starting the 
drug and symptom onset. Reassess after trial 
discontinuation (if safe to do so) and look for 
alternative causes if symptoms persist Check 
serum levels to exclude toxicity in drugs with a 
narrow therapeutic window, e.g digoxin, lithium, 
theophylline. Establish alcohol intake and ask 
specifically about cannabis use. 


5 


Associated headache or vertigo? 


Consider Tintracranial pressure if vomiting is 
associated with recurrent headache that is: most 
prominent on waking from sleep; aggravated by 
bending, straining or lying; or accompanied by 
papilloedema - arrange urgent CT brain. See 
Chapter 10 for assessment of patients with 
vertigo. 


Longstanding/poorly controlled diabetes 
or previous gastric surgery? 


Suspect gastroparesis in diabetic patients with 
longstanding poor control and/or significant 
microvascular complications or in patients with 
previous gastric surgery (including weight reduc¬ 
tion surgery). Delayed gastric emptying on a 
nuclear scintigraphy scan confirms the diagnosis. 


7 


Suspect eating disorder? 


Consider this in patients with persistent/recurrent 
vomiting despite reassuring Gl investigation who 
have evidence of low mood or self esteem, a 
history of psychiatric disorder or where family 
members raise concern. Typically, vomiting 
occurs after eating and is not directly witnessed. 
Explore the issue sensitively and, if suspected, 
seek expert input at an early stage. 


25 


8 


Refer for Gl review/further investigation 


Arrange UGIE (if not already performed) and refer 
for Gl evaluation if symptoms persist without a 
clear cause. Investigate for chronic pancreatitis if 
there is associated epigastric discomfort, a history 
of chronic alcohol excess and/or steatorrhoea; 
check faecal elastase and arrange abdominal 
CT. Consider functional vomiting if investigations 
are consistently reassuring but be vigilant for 
underlying eating disorder. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





















NAUSEA AND VOMITING 


Further assessment 


Further assessment of renal failure 

Step 1 Recognize renal impairment 

Diagnostic criteria for AKI and CKD are shown 
in Box 25.3 and Table 25.1. 

Step 2 Identify and treat hyperkalaemia 

TK + may cause life-threatening arrhythmias and 
cardiac arrest. Perform an ECG if >5.5 mmol/L 
to look for: 

• early changes: tall, peaked T waves 

• advanced changes: flattened P waves, TPR 
interval, TQRS duration. 

Treat as follows: 

• give IV calcium, e.g. 10% calcium 
gluconate, with continuous ECG monitoring 


Box 25.3 Diagnostic criteria for acute 
kidney injury 


1. Increase in serum creatinine by >26 jumol/L from 
baseline within 48 hours 

2. Increase in serum creatinine >1.5-fold from 
baseline within 1 week 

3. Urine output <0.5 mL/kg/hr for >6 consecutive hours 


Source: Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes. 2010. 
Clinical practice guideline on acute kidney injury. Available 
online at http://www.kdigo.org 


Table 25.1 Classification of chronic 
kidney disease 

Stage Category 

GFR (mL/min/ 
1.73 m 2 ) 

1 Evidence of chronic 

kidney damage 1 with 
normal GFR 

>90 

2 Evidence of chronic 

kidney damage 1 with 
mild impairment of GFR 

60-89 

3 Moderate impairment 

of GFR 

30-59 

4 Severe impairment 

of GFR 

15-29 

5 End-stage renal failure 

<15 

'Evidence of chronic kidney damage includes: 

• persistent microaibuminuria/proteinuria/haematuria 

• structural kidney abnormalities on imaging 

• features of chronic glomerulonephritis on renal biopsy. 

Source: Kidney Disease Outcome Quality Initiative 2002. KJ 

DOQI clinical practice guidelines for chronic kidney disease: 
evaluation, classification, and stratification. Am J Kidney D s. 

39(2 Suppl 2):S1-246. 


if there are ECG changes - titrate up to 
10 mL until changes resolve 

• give treatment to lower K + , e.g. IV dextrose 
and insulin, especially if K + >6.0 mmol/L 

or ECG changes. Repeat U+E and ECG 
following treatment 

• consider the need for urgent renal review 
(Box 25.4). 

Step 3 Distinguish CKD from AKI 

Previous U+E results are the best guide to the 
chronicity of renal impairment. If unavailable, 
possible clues to CKD include: 

• evidence of metabolic bone disease 
(especially Tparathyroid hormone) 

• bilateral small kidneys on USS 

• gradual onset of oedema over weeks to 
months. 

Assume AKI, at least initially, if none of these 
features is present and there are no previous 
U+E results for comparison. 

Step 4 If de novo presentation, perform a full 
diagnostic work-up 

• Assess volume status: renal hypoperfusion 
(‘pre-renal’ failure) is the most common 
cause of AKI Look for: 

• predisposing factors (diarrhoea, 
vomiting, blood loss, -loral intake, 
diuretics), 

• features of dehydration (iskin turgor, d y 
mucous membranes, thirst) and 

• signs of shock (see Box 30.1 , p. 267). 

If you suspect hypovolaemia, assess the response 
of urine output and U+E to fluid resuscitation and 
correction of underlying causes 

• Exclude obstruction: bladder outflow 
obstruction occurs most frequently in males 


Box 25.4 Reasons for urgent renal referral 


• Indication for urgent renal replacement therapy 

Tk + or pulmonary oedema refractory to medical 

management 

Severe metabolic acidosis 

Uraemic pericarditis 

Uraemic encephalopathy 

• Progressive increase in serum creatinine despite fluid 
resuscitation/withholding of nephrotoxins 

• Persistently oliguric or anuric patients 

• Suspected glomerular disease 

• CKD patients with increasing symptoms of uraemia 
or likely progression to stage 5 CKD 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



























NAUSEA AND VOMITING 


Further assessment 


with prostatic enlargement. Insert a urinary 
catheter if there is a palpable bladder 
or Tpost-void residual urine on bladder 
scanning. Request a renal USS to exclude 
upper renal tract obstruction. 

• Review all recent prescriptions and ask 
about non-prescribed drugs. Common 
culprits include radiographic contrast 
media, NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors/angiotensin 
receptor blockers, antimicrobials 
(gentamicin, vancomycin penicillins, 
amphotericin B) and ciclosporin. 

• Seek evidence of sepsis (Box 14.1 , p. 141), 
and, if present, perform a full septic screen 
as per Chapter 1 4. 

• Consider other causes: suspect 
glomerulonephritis in any patient with 
heavy, e.g. >3+, haematuria/proteinuria on 
dipstick. Evaluate for multisystem disease 
(rash, joint disease, haemoptysis), perform 
serological investigations (Table 25.2) and 
discuss urgently with the renal team. 

• Consider haemolytic uraemic syndrome/ 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura if 
AKI is accompanied by an acute diarrhoeal 
illness or neurological features. Review 
the FBC/blood film for: J-Hb, ^platelets, 
Treticulocytes and red cell fragments. Seek 
immediate expert advice if suspected. 

• Consider rhabdomyolysis in patients with a 
history of trauma, a long period lying on the 
floor or recreational drug use, e.g. cocaine. 
Check CK (>x5 upper limit of normal) and 
perform urinalysis +/- urine microscopy 


Table 25.2 Serological investigations in 
suspected glomerulonephritis 

Test 

Underlying diagnosis 

ANA 

Connective tissue disease, 
e g. SLE 

Anti ds-DNA 

Extractable nuclear 
antigens 

Anti GBM antibodies 

Goodpasture’s disease 

ANCA 

Vasculitis, e.g. 
granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis 

Antistreptolysin 

Post-streptococcal 

0 titre 

glomerulonephritis 

Cryoglobulins 

Cryoglobulinaemia 


(dipstick haematuria with no red cells on 
microscopy suggests myoglobinuria). 

• Send plasma for protein electrophoresis 
and urine for Bence Jones protein if 
you suspect multiple myeloma, e g. 
hypercalcaemia, bone pain pathological 
fractures, or if the cause of renal 
dysfunction remains unclear. 

Step 5 If acute-on-chronic impairment, consider 
reasons for deterioration 

Acute deterioration is often due to 

• dehydration 

• infection 

• hypotension 

• nephrotoxic agent (see above). 

Identify and reverse these causes, monitor renal 
function and discuss with the renal team if here 
is any further decline in GFR. 

Step 6 If stable CKD, seek evidence 
of complications 

Sequelae of CKD should be sought and cor¬ 
rected, if possible. 

• Renal anaemia: this may result from 
inadequate renal production of erythropoietin. 
Measure ferritin and transferrin saturation to 
ensure that he patient is iron-replete (ferritin 
>100 ng/mL; transferrin saturation >20%), 
exclude other causes of anaemia (p. 1 36) and 
refer to a nephrologist for consideration of 
erythropoiesis-stimulating agents. 

• Metabolic acidosis: this is indicated by 
a low venous bicarbonate and can be 
corrected by oral sodium bicarbonate. 

• Metabolic bone disease: Iphosphate 
excretion and irenal activation of vitamin 
D result in TPOy^, ICa 2+ and Tparathyroid 
hormone (secondary hyperparathyroidism). 
Treat with phosphate binders and vitamin D 
analogues, aiming to maintain plasma Ca 2+ 
and P0 4 3 ~ within normal limits. 

• Volume overload: in advanced CKD, oliguria 
may result in significant fluid overload, with 
peripheral ± pulmonary oedema. Liaise with 
a nephrologist if this is refractory to diuretic 
therapy and salt restriction. 

• Hypertension: TBP is common in CKD, 
accelerates the decline in renal function 
and increases cardiovascular risk. 

Monitor BP and aim for strict targets, e.g. 
<130/80 mmHg. 


25 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

















Q Palpitation 


Palpitation is an unpleasant awareness of the 
heartbeat. Patients may describe the sensation 
as skipping, fluttering, racing, pounding, thudding 
or jumping. Episodes can be unpleasant and 
frightening but most are benign and less than half 
are due to a heart rhythm abnormality. In most 
cases, the key to diagnosis lies in documenting 
the cardiac rhythm during symptoms. Establish 
the frequency, intensity and impact of symptoms 
as this is essential to guide treatment. 

Heightened awareness of 
normal heartbeat 

Awareness of the normal heartbeat is common 
but may produce anxiety in patients with psy¬ 
chosocial stress or health concerns, e.g. recent 
heart ‘scare’, death of family member. It is most 
commonly noted when lying awake in bed or 
sitting at rest. 

Sinus tachycardia/Tstroke volume 

Causes of sinus tachycardia are shown in Box 
26.1 ; anxiety is the most frequent aetiology, with 
patients typically reporting episodes of a fast, 
regular, pounding heartbeat that builds up and 
resolves over minutes. Increased stroke volume 
due to aortic regurgitation or vasodilator drugs 
may produce a forceful heartbeat without 
tachycardia. 

Extrasystoles 

Atrial or ventricular extrasystoles (ectopics or 
premature beats) do not usually cause symptoms 
but, in some patients, produce a sensation of 
dropped beats (due to ^stroke volume of the 
ectopic beat), 'jolts’ or ‘thumps’ (due to Tstroke 
volume of the post-ectopic sinus beat), or, if 
frequent, an irregular heartbeat. Extrasystoles 
are common in healthy individuals and usually 
benign, but frequent ventricular extrasystoles, 
particularly in older patients may indicate 
underlying structural or coronary heart disease. 


Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia 

‘Supraventricular tachycardia’ (SVT) refers 
to atrioventricular nodal re-entry tachycardia 
(AVNRT) and AV re-entry tachycardia (AVRT). 
AVNRT is due to right atrial and AV node re-entry, 
usually in structurally normal hearts; AVRT (known 
as Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome ) is caused 
by a re-entry circuit formed from the AV node and 
an ‘accessory pathway’ - an abnormal band of 
conducting tissue connecting atria and ventricles. 

Both produce episodes of regular tachycardia 
(± light-headedness and breathlessness) with 
an abrupt onset and offset. The ECG shows a 
regular narrow-complex tachycardia at 140-220/ 
min (Fig. 26.1). 

In 50% of patients with an accessory pathway, 
the ECG in sinus rhythm shows a short PR interval 
and slurring of the QRS upstroke (‘delta wave’) 
due to premature activation of ventricular tissue 
by the pathway - ’pre-excitation’ (Fig. 26.2). 

Most cases of AVNRT and AVRT are curable 
with radiofrequency catheter ablation. 

Atrial arrhythmias (atrial tachycardia, 
flutter and fibrillation) 

Atrial tachycardia produces symptoms similar to 
SVT; the ECG shows a regular narrow-complex 
tachycardia with abnormal P waves. 

Atrial flutter is caused by a large re-entry circuit 
within the right atrium that generates an atrial rate 
of 300/min. This is usually associated with AV 
block, resulting in a ventricular rate of 150/min (2:1 
block) or 100/min (3:1). Symptoms are similar to 
SVT. The ECG shows a regular narrow-complex 
tachycardia with ‘saw-toothed’ flutter waves (Fig. 
26 3). With 2:1 block these may be obscured so 
suspect atrial flutter in any patient with a regular 
narrow-complex tachycardia of 150/min 

Atrial fibrillation is common. Underlying causes 
are shown in Box 26.2. Atrial activity is chaotic 
and the ventricles are activated rapidly and 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













PALPITATION 


Differential diagnosis 


233 


Box 26.1 Causes of sinus tachycardia 


• Anxiety or panic disorder 

• Stress or strong emotion 

• Drugs: beta 2 agonists, anticholinergics, cocaine, 
amphetamines 

• Anaemia 

• Thyrotoxicosis 

• Fever 

• Pregnancy 

• Phaeochromocytoma 


irregularly. Patients with paroxysmal atrial fibril- 
la ion experience an erratic or irregular heartbeat 
that is usually fast and may be associated with 
breathlessness, light-headedness or ^effort 
tolerance. The ECG shows an irregular narrow- 
complex tachycardia with no P wa es (Fig. 26.4). 
Patients with atrial fibrillation or flutter are at 
greater risk of thromboembolic complications, 
including stroke. 



Fig. 26.1 Supraventricular tachycardia. (From Hampton JR 150 ECG Problems, 3rd edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, 2008.) 



26 


Fig. 26.2 Pre-excitation: sinus rhythm in Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. (From Hampton JR. The ECG Made 
Easy, 7th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2008.) 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
















PALPITATION 


Differential diagnosis 



Fig. 26.3 Atrial flutter with 2:1 AV block. (From Hampton JR. The ECG in Practice, 5th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, 2008.) 



Fig. 26.4 Atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response. (From Hampton JR. The ECG in Practice, 5th edn. 
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2008.) 


Box 26.2 Common causes of atrial fibrillation 


• Hypertension 

• Ischaemic heart disease 

• Valvular heart disease (especially mitral stenosis) 

• Alcohol 

• Cardiomyopathy 

• Sick sinus syndrome 

• Congenital heart disease 

• Constrictive pericarditis 

• Hyperthyroidism 

• Idiopathic ('lone' atrial fibrillation) 


Ventricular tachycardia 

Ventricular tachycardia (VT) is a potentially 
life-threatening arrhythmia that most frequently 
occurs in patients with previous Ml or cardio¬ 
myopathy but can arise in structurally normal 


hearts. Rapid palpitation is often accompanied 
by pre-syncope (a feeling of faintness and 
near-collapse), syncope, breathlessness or chest 
pain. In patients with significant underlying left 
ventricular impairment, palpitation is frequently 
absent. The ECG shows a regular broad-complex 
tachycardia (Fig. 26.5). A variant, torsades de 
pointes, with a characteristic ECG appearance 
(Fig. 26.6), may occur in patients with a pro¬ 
longed QT interval. 

Bradyarrhythmia, e.g. sick sinus 
syndrome, intermittent AV block 

Bradyarrhythmias more commonly present with 
light-headedness or syncope but the patient may 
report intermittent episodes of a slow but forceful 
heartbeat Associated ECG findings include sinus 
pauses, junctional bradycardia and intermittent 
second- or third-degree AV block (Figs 31 1 
and 31.2, p. 279). 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
















PALPITATION 


Differential diagnosis 


235 



Fig. 26.5 Ventricular tachycardia. (From Hampton JR. The ECG in Practce, 5th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, 2008.) 



Fig. 26.6 Torsades de pointes. (From Boon NA, Colledge NR, Walker BR. Davidson's Principles & Practice of Medicine, 
20th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2006.) 


26 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 














PALPITATION 


236 “ 

Overview 


1 Symptoms present during consultation? 


Yes 


. Feel pulse, _ n . 

-► . '-► Diagnosis 

perform ECG 


No 


Full clinical assessment, ECG 


2 Clear history of extrasystoles? 


Yes 


-► Symptomatic extrasystoles 


No 


^ Heartbeat regular and normal 
speed during symptoms? 


Yes 


tS roke volume / awareness of normal heartbeat 


No 


Attempt to document rhythm during symptoms 


Rhythm documented during 

Yes 

typical symptoms? 


| No 

Yes 

Alarm features or highly symptomatic? 


| No 



See Further assessment of 


-► Diagnosis 


_ _ _ palpitation with 

documented rhythm 
(p. 239) 


refer Cardiology / empirical treatment 


Cause uncertain: reassure; refer Cardiology if recurrent troublesome symptoms 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 








































PALPITATION 


237 


Step-by-step assessment 


1 Symptoms present during consultation? 

If the patient has symptoms during the consulta¬ 
tion feel the pulse straight away and perform an 
ECG as soon as possible. This may sound overly 
simple but much of the difficulty in diagnosing 
palpitation lies in trying to document the rhythm 
during a typical episode of symptoms. Do not 
miss the opportunity! 


2 


Clear history of extrasystoles? 


It is not always possible to distinguish frequent 
extrasystoles from sustained arrhythmias such 
as atrial fibrillation on the history alone. However, 
a clear history of an occasional ‘jolt’ or ‘jump’ 
in the chest or isolated ‘dropped’ or ‘skipped’ 
beats is highly suggestive - such patients can 
usually be reassured without further investigation 


3 


Heartbeat regular and normal speed 
during symptoms? 


Many patients with palpitation describe the 
heartbeat as ‘forceful’ or ‘strong’ rather than fast, 
slow or irregular. This may reflect Tstroke volume, 
e.g. aortic regurgitation, anaemia, vasodilators, 
or simply awareness of the normal heartbeat 
but, in either case, it argues strongly against an 
arrhythmic cause Look for underlying physical 
and psychosocial factors, but further investigation 
is usually unnecessary unless there is a specific 
additional concern. 


Attempt to document rhythm during 
symptoms 

This is a key diagnostic step. The chosen method 
will be dictated predominantly by the frequency 
of symptoms. 

• Consider inpatient telemetry If the patient 
has experienced a recent episode, e.g. 
in the last 72 hours, with syncope or 
pre-syncope, or has other high-risk features 

(p. 280). 


• Use Holter monitoring if symptoms are 
occurring frequently. A 24-hour Holter 
monitor is useful only in patients who 
have at least daily symptoms, a 48-hour 
Holter monitor can be used in those with 
symptoms on most days, and a 7-day 
monitor is useful for those wth weekly 
symptoms, 

• If symptoms are occurring less than weekly, 
consider more prolonged ambulatory 
monitoring through a wireless ECG patch 
recorder or an external patient-activated 
recorder Ambulatory smart phone monitors 
are now available that are patient activated 
and allow an ECG to be recorded and sent 
to the clinician. 

• If symptoms are very infrequent, ask the 
patient to phone for an ambulance or report 
to their family doctor or to an emergency 
department during an episode (advise 

not to drive) or, depending on symptom 
severity, consider referral for insertion of an 
implantable loop recorder. 

• If symptoms are induced by physical exertion, 
refer for a supervised exercise ECG. 


4 


Rhythm documented during 
typical symptoms? 


Diagnose arrhythmia as the cause of palpita¬ 
tion if you obtain an ECG recording of rhythm 
disturbance that corresponds with symptoms 
- proceed to ‘Further assessment of palpitation 
with documented rhythm’. 

Clear documentation of sinus rhythm during 
a typical attack excludes an arrhythmic cause 
for symptoms. 

Asymptomatic rhythm disturbances may 
occur during prolonged ECG monitoring. The 
patient may need further assessment for the 
specific arrhythmia but symptoms should not 
automatically be attributed to it - especially if 
typical symptoms occur during periods of sinus 


26 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















238 


PALPITATION 


Step-by-step assessment 


rhythm. Consult a cardiologist if there is any 
doubt as to the significance of an ECG recording. 

Continue to step 5 if the patient did not experi¬ 
ence a typical episode of palpitation during the 
period of rhythm monitoring. 


5 Alarm features or highly symptomatic? 

The lengths to which you should go to document 
the ECG during symptoms depends on both the 
severity of symptoms and the estimated risk of a 
life-threatening arrhythmia, e.g. VT or complete 
heart block. 

Consider reassurance without further investiga¬ 
tion for patients with mild, infrequent symptoms 
and no high-risk features; reassess if symptoms 


subsequently become more frequent or intrusive. 
Persist with attempts to document the rhythm 
in patients with symptoms that are frequent, 
unpleasant or which interfere with occupation 
or lifestyle. 

Irrespective of symptom frequency and 
intensity, refer patients with any of the following 
features to cardiology for further investigation: 

• palpitation associated with syncope or 
pre-syncope 

• family history of sudden cardiac death or 
inheritable cardiac conditions 

• significant abnormality on resting ECG 

• risk factors for VT, e.g. previous Ml, 
ventricular surgery, cardiomyopathy. 


Table 26.1 CHA 2 DS 2 -VASC thromboembolic 
risk score 


Thromboembolic risk factor 

Points 

Congestive heart failure: clinical 
evidence of heart failure or reduced 

LV ejection fraction 

1 

Hypertension 

1 

Age: >75 years 

2 

Diabetes mellitus 

1 

Stroke: previous stroke, TIA or 
systemic embolism 

2 

Vascular disease: history of Ml, 
peripheral arterial disease or aortic 
atheroma 

1 

Age: 64-75 years 

1 

Sex: female sex 

1 


Risk of thromboembolic events (event rate/100 
person years) according to score 
Score 0 = low risk (0.78) 

Score 1 = intermediate risk (2.01) 

Score >2 = high risk (8.82) 


Modified from Kirchhof Petal. 2016. 2016 ESC Guidelines for 
the management of atrial fibrillation developed in collaboration 
with EACTS. EurHeart! 37(38):2893-2962 and Olesen 
JB et at. 2011. Validation of risk stratification schemes for 
predicting strok and thromboembolism in patients with atrial 
fibrillation: nationwide cohort study. Br Med J. 342:d124. 


Table 26.2 HAS-BLED bleeding risk score 


Bleeding risk factor 

Points 

Hypertension: uncontrolled hypertension 

1 

(systolic BP >160 mmHg) 


Abnormal renal/liver function: 


Dialysis or serum creatinine >200 

1 

micromol/L 


Cirrhosis or bilirubin >2x normal or ALT 

1 

>3x normal 


Stroke: previous stroke 

1 

Bleeding: previous major bleed or 

1 

predisposition to bleeding 


Labile INR: time in therapeutic range 

1 

<60% 


Elderly: age >65 years 

1 

Drugs/alcohol: 


Concomitant use of antiplatelet or 

1 

non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 


drugs 


>8 alcoholic drinks per week 

1 

Score >3 indicates higher risk of major 


bleeding. 



Modified from Pisters R et al. 2010. A novel user-friendly 
score (HAS-BLED) to assess 1 -year risk of major bleeding in 
patients with atrial fibrillation: the Euro Heart Survey. Chest. 
138(5):1093-1100. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


































PALPITATION 


Further assessment 


Further assessment of palpitation with 
documented rhythm 

Assess the frequency and intensity of symptoms 

and the impact on occupation and lifestyle. 

Establish the efficacy and side-effects of previous 

treatments. 

Sinus tachycardia 

• Review all prescribed and ‘recreational’ 
drugs, screen for anaemia and 
hyperthyroidism with FBC/TFTs and, where 
appropriate, perform a pregnancy test. 

• If Tbp or if episodes are associated with 
headache, flushing or Gl upset, measure 
24-hour urinary metanephrines to exclude 
phaeochromocytoma. 

• Request an echocardiogram if there are any 
features to suggest structural heart disease 
e.g. unexplained murmur, signs of heart 
failure. 

• Look for evidence of an anxiety or panic 
disorder. 

Extrasystoles 

• Seek potential exacerbating factors 
including J-K + , iMg 2+ , drugs, e.g. tricyclic 
antidepressants, digoxin, alcohol, tobacco 
or (possibly) caffeine consumption. 

• Consider further investigation, e.g. 
echocardiography, exercise ECG if frequent 
or associated with other signs/symptoms of 
CVS disease. 

Supraventricular tachycardia 

• Look for pre-excitation on resting ECG 
(see Fig. 26.2) to suggest an accessory 
pathway-mediated tachycardia. 

• Refer to cardiology for electrophysiology 
study ± radiofrequency ablation if 
symptoms are frequent, disabling or 
unpleasant or if there are side-effects on 
medical therapy. 


Atrial flutter/fibrillation 

• Perform echocardiography to 
exclude structural heart disease, 
e.g. cardiomyopathy, left ventricular 
hypertrophy, valvular disease. 

• Seek causative or exacerbating factors: 
measure BP, electrolytes and TFT; enquire 
about alcohol intake and symptoms of 
angina. 

• Use the CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc score (Table 26.1) 
to assess thromboembolic risk in patients 
with non-valvular atrial fibrillation (all patients 
with mitral stenosis are at high risk) and the 
HAS BLED score (Table 26.2) to assess the 
risk of major bleeding. 

• Refer to Cardiology if symptoms are 
frequent, distressing or disabling 
despite first-line medical therapy, e.g. 
beta-blockers. 

Ventricular tachycardia 

• Perform an ECG to look for evidence of 
underlying structural heart disease, e.g. 
cardiomyopathy. 

• Enquire about previous Ml and symptoms 
of/risk factors for ischaemic heart disease. 

• Measure the QT interval on the ECG in 
sinus rhythm. 

• Measure electrolytes - especially K + , Mg 2+ 
and Ca 2+ . 

• Refer all patients to Cardiology for further 
investigation, risk stratification and 
treatment. 

Bradyarrhythmia 

• Seek an underlying cause: check TFTs and 
review drugs for rate-limiting agents, e.g. 
digoxin, beta-blockers, verapamil. 

• Refer symptomatic bradyarrhythmia or 
asymptomatic second-degree AV block 
(Mobitz type 2), complete heart block or 
sinus pauses >3 seconds to Cardiology. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


26 













Rash: acute generalized 
/ skin eruption 


The accurate diagnosis of skin disease is usually 
based on visual pattern recognition developed 
through experience rather than analytical 
rule-based approaches. This is a step-by-step 
approach to assist identification of important 
acute generalized eruptions that require urgent 
advice and treatment. 

Erythroderma 

Erythroderma (red skin) describes inflamma 
tory skin disease manifesting predominantly 
as erythema and involving >90% of the body 
surface area (BSA; Fig. 27.1). The term ‘sub- 
erythrodermic’ is sometimes used to describe 
extensive erythema covering <90% BSA. Acute 
erythroderma can be life-threatening and most 
cases need hospitalization and urgent dermatol¬ 
ogy review. The major causes are eczema (40%), 
psoriasis (25%), cutaneous lymphoma (15%) and 
drug eruptions 10%). 

Eczema 

‘Eczema’ and ‘dermatitis’ are interchangeable 
terms. Dermatitis is used to denote a group 
of non-infective inflammatory skin diseases 
that represent a reaction pattern to various 
stimuli. Dermatitis may be classified by aetiology 
(atopic, irritant, allergic/contact, venous/stasis), 
morphology (seborrhoeic, discoid) or site (palmar, 
plantar, pompholyx). All produce the same key 
clinical feature: pruritic, erythematous lesions 
with typically indistinct margins. The lesions can 
progress through a number of phases: acute 
(with vesicles and bullae - Fig. 27.2), subacute 
(with scaling and crusting) and chronic (with 
acanthosis, lichenification and fissuring). Lesions 
may become secondarily infected by bacteria 
forming a crusted yellow exudate (‘impetigo’) (Fig. 
27 3) or by viruses, e.g. herpes simplex, produc¬ 
ing a vesicular pattern (‘eczema herpeticum’) 


Psoriasis 

Psoriasis, a very common papulosquamous 
eruption, is characterized by well-demarcated 
erythematous or purple papules and plaques, 
topped with silvery scale. There are three forms 
of acute eruption: erythroderma (see above), 
pustular psoriasis (Fig. 27.4) - a form that can 
deteriorate rapidly and guttate psoriasis (Fig. 
27.5) - with characteristic widespread multiple 
‘drop-like’ lesions, most commonly seen in 
young adults in association with streptococcal 
pharyngitis. Pityriasis rosea is often confused 
with psoriasis. It may be a reaction to a 
viral infection and initially presents with a single 
‘herald patch’ followed by the subsequent 
development of multiple lesions on the torso 
(Fig. 27.6). 

Toxic epidermal necrolysis, 

Stevens Johnson syndrome 
and erythema multiforme 

Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is the severe 
end of a spectrum of acute eruptions caused by 
a cell-mediated cytotoxic reaction against epider¬ 
mal cells (Fig. 27.7). It is characterized by fever 
(>38° C), widespread tender erythema affect¬ 
ing >30% of the skin surface, and mucosal 
involvement (see below). Erythema is followed 
by extensive, full-thickness, cutaneous and 
mucosal necrosis and denudation within a couple 
of days. Similar features involving <10% of the 
body surface are termed Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome (SJS), also known as ‘erythema 
multiforme major’; if 10-30% of body surface 
area is affected, this is often classified as TEN/ 
SJS overlap. Drugs, e.g. allopurinol, anticonvul¬ 
sants, NSAIDs, cause >80% of cases and have 
usually been commenced 1-3 weeks prior to 
presentation. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 











RASH: ACUTE GENERALIZED SKIN ERUPTION 


Differential diagnosis 



Fig. 27.1 Erythroderma. (From Gawkrodger DJ. Dermatology ICT, 4th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2008.) 



Fig. 27.2 Acute dermatitis. (From Gawkrodger DJ. Fig. 27.3 Impetigo. (From Kumar P, Clark M. Kumar & 

Dermatology ICT, 4th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Clark s Clinical Medicine, 7th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 

Livingstone, 2008.) Livingstone, 2009.) 



Fig. 27.4 Pustular psoriasis. (From Gawkrodger DJ. Dermatology ICT, 4th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2008.) 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 







RASH: ACUTE GENERALIZED SKIN ERUPTION 


242 


Differential diagnosis 



Fig. 27.5 Guttate psoriasis. (From Bolognia J, Jorizzo J, 
Rapini R. Dermatology 1st edn. London: Mosby, 2003.) 


Fig. 27.6 Pityriasis rosea. (From Gawkrodger DJ. 
Dermatology ICT, 4th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, 2008.) 


Erythema multiforme (minor) represents a 
similar but milder type of cytotoxic reaction 
Classically, it presents with ‘target’ lesions, 
consisting of three zones: a dark or blistered 
centre (bull’s-eye) surrounded by a pale zone 
and an outer rim of erythema (Fig. 27.8). The 
lesions predominantly occur on the hands/feet 
and affect <10% of the BSA without mucous 
membrane involvement. The underlying cause 
is more often viral (especially herpes simplex) 
than drug-induced. 

Pemphigus/pemphigoid/dermatitis 

herpetiformis 

Separation of keratinocytes from each other, or 
from the underlying dermis, produces blistering. 
The three most common blistering disorders are 
pemphigus (Fig. 27.9), pemphigoid (Fig. 27 10) 



Fig. 27.8 Erythema multiforme-target lesions. (From 
Bolognia J, Jorizzo J, Rapini R. Dermatology, 1st edn. 
London: Mosby, 2003.) 





Fig. 27.7 Toxic epidermal necrolysis. (From Gawkrodger DJ. Dermatology ICT, 4th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2008.) 

downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 








RASH: ACUTE GENERALIZED SKIN ERUPTION 


Differential diagnosis 




Fig. 27.10 Pemphigoid. (From Bolognia J, Jorizzo J, Rapini R. Dermatology, 1st edn. London: Mosby, 2003.) 


and dermatitis herpetiformis (Fig. 27.11) which 
is commonly associated with coeliac disease. 


Urticaria/angioedema 

Urticaria (Fig, 27.12) is oedema within the dermis 
secondary to mast cell degranulation, and is a 
common skin reaction Angioedema results from 
oedema deeper within the dermis and subcuta¬ 
neous tissues, and may occur in up to 40% of 
cases. Although commonly thought to be allergic, 
most cases of acute urticaria are not mediated by 
immunoglobulin E (IgE). Those that are, arise in 
response to drugs (especially antibiotics), foods 
(peanuts, eggs, shellfish) and skin contact (latex, 
plants, bee/wasp stings), and may progress to 
anaphylaxis. Non-lgE causes include concurrent 



Fig. 27.11 Dermatitis herpetiformis. (From Gawkrodger 
DJ. Dermatology ICT, 4th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, 2008.) 


27 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 












RASH: ACUTE GENERALIZED SKIN ERUPTION 


Differential diagnosis 



Fig. 27.12 Urticaria. (From Gawkrodger DJ. Dermatology ICT, 4th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2008.) 


infection (especially upper respiratory tract infec¬ 
tions), drugs that promote mast cell degranulation 
(opiates, aspirin, NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors) and foods 
that contain salicylates and additives. 

Purpura (including vasculitis) 

Purpura (Fig. 27.13) is fixed staining of the 
skin by leakage of blood from the intravascular 
space and needs to be distinguished from simple 
bruising. Causes include: 

• septic emboli from systemic infectious 
diseases 

• haematological disorders 

• thrombosis involving microcirculation 

• vasculitis (inflammation in vessel walls). 


Acute exanthems 

‘Exanthem’ simply means ‘breakout’ and, 
although the term is mostly used for rashes with 
an infectious aetiology, it may be regarded as 
a pseudonym for any acute eruption or rash. 

Drug eruptions are common and do not 
necessarily indicate allergy; -3% of all patients 
admitted to hospital have an eruption due to 
adverse drug reactions. Those most commonly 



Fig. 27.13 Vasculitis/purpura. (From Gawkrodger DJ. 
Dermatology ICT, 4th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, 2008.) 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 











RASH: ACUTE GENERALIZED SKIN ERUPTION 


Differential diagnosis 


Box 27.1 Drugs that cause rashes in >1% 
of the population 


• Penicillins 

• Carbamazepine 

• Allopurinol 

• Gold 

• Sulphonamides 

• NSAIDs 

• Phenytoin 

• Isoniazid 

• Chloramphenicol 

• Erythromycin 

• Streptomycin 


implicated are listed in Box 27.1. In hospital, 
rashes are commonly attributed to and often 
caused by medications, but similar cutaneous 
signs can be due to underlying or intercurrent 
illness, e.g. viral or bacterial exanthems or internal 
disease, non-specific reactions to treatment, 
e.g. sweat rash due to prolonged bed-rest or 
previously unidentified independent skin disease. 

Infective exanthems are largely viral. Many of the 
conditions described above could be considered 
specific examples of infective exanthems, e.g. 
erythema multiforme post-herpes simplex, guttate 
psoriasis post-pharyngitis and pityriasis rosea. 


27 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 








RASH: ACUTE GENERALIZED SKIN ERUPTION 


246 “ . - 

Overview 


Ful clinical assessment 


>90% body surface area erythematous? 


No 


Yes 


-► Erythroderma 


-► 


Urgent 

Dermatology input 


Blisters present? 

No I Yes 


Mucous membrane involvement? 


| No 

Blisters >5 mm? 


Stevens-Johnson 
Yes syndrome / toxic 

* epidermal necrolysis / 
acute pemphigus 


- - ► 


Urgent 

Dermatology input 


Yes Consider bullous pemphigoid, erythema 

-► multiforme, fixed drug eruption, acute 

dermatitis, insect bite 


No 


Consider herpes simplex / zoster, dermatitis herpetiformis, chickenpox, 
impetigo, acute dermatitis 


Purpura present? 

No I Yes 


Evidence of infection? 


Yes 


-► Consider meningococcal sepsis / endocarditis 


No 



Yes 





No 



Coagulopathy, anticoagulant therapy, 
disseminated intravascular coagulation 
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura 


Consider vasculitis or drug reaction (see text) 


Pustules present? 


Yes 


-► Likely pustular psoriasis or systemic infection 


No 


Wheals present? 


Yes 


-► Urticaria 


---► Seek precipitant 


No 


Underlying chronic dermatosis? 


Yes 


-► Consider acute flare 


No 


7 Likely drug reaction or infective exanthem. Refer Dermatology if persistent or severe symptoms 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 




































































RASH: ACUTE GENERALIZED SKIN ERUPTION 


Step-by-step assessment 


1 >90% body surface area erythematous? 

Estimate the proportion of skin that is erythe¬ 
matous using the guide in Box 27.2; >90% of 
BSA indicates erythroderma. Admit any patient 
with acute erythroderma to hospital, assess and 
stabilize as described in Box 27.3 and arrange 
urgent dermatology review. Subsequent treat¬ 
ment is based on the exact diagnosis and guided 
by expert dermatological assessment. 


2 


Blisters present? 


Blisters form when fluid separates the layers of 
the skin; blisters <5 mm diameter are termed 
‘vesicles’, those >5 mm are called ‘bullae’. 
Mucous membranes are involved (Fig. 27.14) 


Box 27.2 Calculating body surface area 


Originally developed for calculating surface area for bum 
victims, in adults a simple way of calculating the BSA 
affected by a cutaneous disorder is the ‘Wallace rule 
of nines’. This system allocates to different body parts 
9% (or half thereof) of the total BSA. In extensive skin 
disease it is sometimes easier to identify unaffected 
skin, and assessment is aided by remembering that the 
patient's hand is approximately 1 % of BSA. 



when erosions and ulceration (with subsequent 
crusting) occur on oral, genital and ocular 
epithelium; examine these sites in any acute 
severe skin eruption. 

Suspect TEN if there is extensive blistering with 
peeling of the skin to reveal bright red oozing 
dermis (see Fig. 27.6), along with mucous mem¬ 
brane involvement; seek immediate Dermatology 
review and manage in a burns or critical care 
unit, if bullae and mucosal lesions are present 
but blistering is less extensive, consider SJS 
and pemphigus (see Fig. 27.9) - arrange prompt 
dermatological review in all cases. 

In the absence of mucous membrane involve¬ 
ment look for target lesions (see Fig. 27.8) on 
the hands and feet suggestive of erythema 
multiforme; otherwise, consider bullous pem¬ 
phigoid (see Fig. 27.10), fixed drug eruption or, 
if lesions are well localized, an insect bite or 
contact dermatitis. 

If the patient has a painful eruption of vesi¬ 
cles, suspect infection with herpes simplex if it 
is confined to the face, lip or finger (herpetic 
whitlow) and herpes zoster (shingles; Fig. 27.15) 
if it follows a dermatomal distribution. In febrile 
patients with widespread vesicles consider 


Box 27.3 Assessment and immediate 
management of skin dysfunction 


The mainstay of emergency dermatology treatment is 
to provide surrogate skin function until the underlying 
condition has resolved or is suppressed with suitable 
medication. Look for evidence of shock (see Box 30.1 , 
p. 267) and dehydration, and monitor U+E regularly. 
Replenish fluid lost through defective skin barrier 
function with IV fluids and supplementary electrolytes. 
Take swabs of all areas of suspected infection and, 
if the patient is pyrexial, take blood cultures before 
commencing antibiotic therapy. Use strict aseptic 
technique for blood cultures, ideally through non- 
affected skin, to try to avoid contaminants (more likely 
in dermatologica patients due to Tskin flora load). 
Remember that many acute cutaneous eruptions are 
associated with pyrexia, due not to systemic infection 
but to loss of temperature homeostasis through 
vasodilatation. Maintain body temperature with a warm 
room and regular antipyretics. Assess the extent of skin 
compromise as detailed above and restore its barrier 
function with regular application of thick emollients 
(liquid paraffin : white soft paraffin, 50:50). Remove 
any potential exacerbates by discontinuing all 
unnecessary medication. 


27 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 






























RASH: ACUTE GENERALIZED SKIN ERUPTION 


Step-by-step assessment 




Fig. 27.14 Mucous membrane involvement in 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome. [A] Oral. [B] Ocular. (From 
Gawkrodger DJ. Dermatology ICT, 4 th edn. Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone, 2008.) 


chickenpox or, if there is known eczema, eczema 
herpeticum Suspect dermatitis herpetiformis if 
the vesicles are intensely itchy and occur on the 
extensor surfaces (see Fig. 27.1 1). 


3 


Purpura present? 


Classify the rash as purpuric if there are dark red 
or purple macules/patches that do not blanch 
with pressure (see Fig. 27.13). 

Take urgent blood cultures and treat empiri¬ 
cally for meningococcal sepsis pending further 
investigation if the patient has fever, shock, 
drowsiness or meningism (see Box 18.2, p. 
169). Consider septic emboli from endocarditis 
if the patient is febrile and has a predisposing 
cardiac lesion or a new murmur. 

Look for evidence of an underlying bleeding 
tendency - ask about/examine for ecchy- 
moses, epistaxis, Gl bleeding, menorrhagia 
haemarthrosis and mucosal haemorrhage, and 
check FBC, PT and APTT. Unless the cause is 
obvious, e.g. excessive anticoagulation chronic 



Fig. 27.15 Herpes zoster. (From Gawkrodger DJ. 
Dermatology ICT, 4 th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, 2008.) 


liver disease, discuss with Flaematology if there 
is coagulopathy or 4-platelets. 

If iplatelets are present with normal coagula¬ 
tion, look for associated features of thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura: 

• 4-Fib without an obvious alternative cause 

• red cell fragmentation on blood film 

• TTldh 

• neurological abnormalities (4-GCS, 
headache, seizures). 

If any of these is present, seek immedia e 
Haematology input, as urgent plasma exchange 
may be life-saving. 

Suspect a systemic vasculitis, e.g. polyarteritis 
nodosa, Henoch-Schonlein purpura, microscopic 
polyangiitis, cryoglobulinaemia, rheumatoid vas¬ 
culitis or other systemic inflammatory disorder - if 
there is palpable purpura accompanied by fever, 
TESR/CRP, constitutional upset, joint disease 
and/or renal involvement (4-GFR, proteinuria, 
haematuria). Perform a full vasculitis/autoimmune 
‘screen’ and consider skin biopsy + biopsy of 
other affected organs. 

Also consider cholesterol embolization or drug 
reaction - seek Dermatology input if the cause 
remains unclear. 


4 


Pustules present? 


Pustules are best thought of as small blisters 
filled with pus (see Fig. 27.3). The key diagnostic 
conundrum is whether they are infective or sterile. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










RASH: ACUTE GENERALIZED SKIN ERUPTION 


249 


Step by-step assessment 


In both cases, the patient may be unwell, with 
significant constitutional upset. 

Assume an infective pustulosis, at least initially, 
if the patient has a fever and the lesions have a 
follicular appearance (individual, palpably raised 
lesions, following the distribution of hair follicles). 
Suspect sterile pustulosis due to either pustular 
psoriasis or drug reaction if the pustules have 
a subcorneal appearance (more superficial, 
often confluent lesions). In either case, admit 
the patient and seek an urgent dermatological 
opinion. 


5 


Wheals present? 


Classify the rash as urticaria if there are wheals: 
transient (<24 hours), erythematous, intensely 
pruritic raised skin lesions (see Fig, 27.12). 
Look for swelling of the lips, face and throat, 
suggesting associated angioedema; patients may 
describe the skin sensation as burning rather than 
itchy. Take a careful food and drug history to 
identify possible precipitants, although in many 
cases a cause cannot be identified (idiopathic 
urticaria). Other than avoidance of any identified 
precipitant, the mainstay of treatment is regular 
antihistamines; most cases subside quickly with 
avoidance of the precipitant and/or antihistamine 
treatment. Refer patients with persistent (>24 
hours) or chronic (>6 weeks) lesions for outpatient 
dermatological assessment. 


6 


Underlying chronic dermatosis? 


Ask about previous skin disease, recent changes 
to dermatological or other medications and spe¬ 
cifically whether the present eruption resembles 
previous rashes. It is very common for hospital 


patients to miss their dermatological medica¬ 
tions due to lack of prescription or interruption 
of their regular topical application routine; if this 
is the case, suspect an acute flare and look for 
resolution of the rash after reinstating routine 
treatment. 


7 


Likely drug reaction or infective 
exanthem. Refer to Dermatology if 
persistent or severe symptoms 


Occasionally, serious acute drug eruptions lack 
the specific features detailed above; seek prompt 
dermatological advice in any patient with signs 
of significant systemic upset, mucous membrane 
involvement or associated lymphadenopathy, or 
if symptoms are persistent and troublesome. 

Consider guttate psoriasis and pityriasis rosea 
if there is an acute papulosquamous eruption (see 
above) over the trunk. Suspect the former if the 
lesions are ‘drop-like’ (see Fig. 27.5) and there 
is a history of upper respiratory tract infection 
within the past 2-3 weeks; suspect the latter if 
the lesions form a ‘Christmas tree’ pattern on the 
back (see Fig. 27.6) and follow a ‘herald patch’. 

Precise identification of infective exanthems is 
seldom required as most do not need specific 
treatment and wil settle conservatively, but seek 
specialist advice if the patient is a returning 
traveller with fever or an unusual rash. 

Review all recent medications, both prescribed 
and over-the-counter drugs. There is significant 
variation in the morphology and exposure-to- 
onset time (minutes to years) of cutaneous drug 
eruptions. If a drug reaction is suspected, e.g. 
a drug from Box 27.1 is involved or there is a 
clear temporal association, attempt to confirm 
by trial discontinuation wherever feasible. 


27 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










Red eye 



The acute red eye (or eyes) is a common pres¬ 
entation. Check visual acuity (VA) in all cases. 
Patients with associated reduced 4-VA, severe 
pain or photophobia require urgent specialist 
ophthalmology referral. 

Conjunctivitis 

Inflammation of the conjunctiva is common. It 
can be infective: viral - commonly adenoviruses 
and Herpes simplex-, bacterial (Streptococcus 
pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, Haemophi¬ 
lus influenzae, Chlamydia trachomatis, Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae-, or fungal; allergic or chemical. It 
can affect one or both eyes and commonly 
presents with eye redness, eyelid swelling 
(usually mild), gritty discomfort and discharge 


(Fig. 28.2). Bacterial and viral conjunctivitis usually 
produce a mucopu ulent discharge and are highly 
contagious. Patients may have difficulty opening 
the eye after sleep because the discharge ‘glues' 
the eyelid margins together. Photophobia and 
iVA are unlikely. 

Foreign body 

The patient often reports a sensation of some¬ 
thing going into the eye - often wind-blown. 
There is redness and often copious watering. On 
examination a small foreign body will be seen, 
superficially adherent to, or embedded in, the 
cornea, or under the upper or lower eyelid (Fig. 
28.3). Photophobia and discomfort may occur, 
aggravated by blinking if the foreign body is 


Clinical tool 

Acute red eye examination 


• Ask about subjective VA in both eyes, unilateral 
versus bilateral symptoms, pain, itchiness, burning 
and grittiness, eye discharge and its character 
(mucopurulent, watery), abnormality of eyelashes, 
eyelid or eye closure, photophobia and a history of a 
foreign body going into the eye (and the mechanism, 
e.g. hammering, grinding, blowing in with wind) 

• If the patient is uncomfortable, put topical anaesthetic 
drops (e.g. oxybuprocaine 0.4%) into the eye Warn 
the patient that this stings for a few seconds before it 
works. 

• Examine eye movements and if appropriate visual 
fields. Pain on eye movement is suggestive of 
scleritis or orbital cellulitis. Look at the fundus with an 
ophthalmoscope. 

• Always check and document objective VA in BOTH 
eyes with their spectacles or a pinhole using a 
Snellen chart 

• Check the position of the lid margins and the position 
of the lashes. 

• Assess pupil size, shape, symmetry and reactivity. 
Assess the clarity of the iris. A hazy iris suggests 
corneal oedema (such as in acute angle glaucoma) or 
inflammatory cells in the anterior chamber (such as 

in iritis). A fluid level may be seen in iritis (co lection 


of pus cells; hypopyon) or trauma (collection of blood; 
hyphaema) 

• Assess the pattern of redness. Diffuse redness 
involving inner eyelid suggests conjunctivitis. 

Segmental redness may indicate episcleritis or scleritis 
(although this may be generalized with deeper scleral 
vessel engorgement). Ciliary injection occurs in iritis 
and corneal conditions. Well-demarcated red eye with 
quiet adjacent conjunctiva is seen with subconjunctival 
haemorrhage. 

• With the slit lamp, carefully inspect the ocular and 
corneal surfaces for ulceration, foreign bodies, 
abrasions and trauma. Examine the anterior chamber 
for pus cells. 

• In addition to carefully examining the cornea and globe 
for foreign bodies, look in the lower lid by gently pulling 
it down and also evert the upper lid with a cotton wool 
bud (Fig 28.1). 

• Instil fluorescein and with the slit lamp and with the 
blue light, carefully re-inspect the ocular and corneal 
surfaces for uptake suggesting ulceration, abrasions 
and trauma. 

• Irrespective of the suspected diagnosis, if TVA 
± severe pain ± photophobia, get emergency 
Ophthalmology review. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













RED EYE 


Differential diagnosis 


251 



Fig. 28.1 Everting the upper eyelid to look at the conjunctiva. (From Douglas G, Nicol F, Robertson C. Macleod's 
Clinical Examination, 13th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2013.) 



Fig. 28.2 Conjunctivitis. (From Batterbury M, Bowling B, 
Murphy C. Ophthalmology, 3rd edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, 2009.) 

lodged under the tarsal plate, but JA/A is unlikely 
unless the foreign body is in the centre of the 
cornea. Fluorescein staining will aid identification. 

Suspect an intraocular foreign body (i.e. one 
which has penetrated the anterior chamber 
or globe) with trauma from mechanical saws, 
grinding or hammering which can produce high 
velocity foreign bodies, or if 4-VA, a hyphaema 
(blood in the anterior chamber) or an abnormal 
pupil is present. 


Subconjunctival haemorrhage 

This is benign self-limiting bleeding from under¬ 
neath the conjunctiva (Fig. 28.4). It is most often 
idiopathic, but is associated with hypertension, 
straining (coughing, sneezing, Valsalva manoeuvre), 
NSAIDs, anticoagulants and bleeding disorders, 
and febrile illnesses, e.g. meningococcaemia, 
typhoid, malaria. The appearance may be dramatic, 
but is usually asymptomatic, painless, and with 
normal VA. If covering the entire conjunctiva there 
can be associated oedema (chemosis). 

Ectropion/entropion/trichiasis/blepharitis 

Ectropion occurs when the eyelid turns outward. 
With entropion the eyelid turns in (Fig. 28.5). Both 
more commonly affect the lower lid and cause 
redness, irritation, and watering and increased 
vulnerability to infections such as conjunctivitis. 
Trichiasis is due to eyelashes that grow back 
towards the eye causing pain and eye redness. 
Blepharitis is an inflammation (usually chronic) 
of the eyelids. 

Keratitis 

Keratitis is an inflammation/ulceration of the 
cornea causing an intensely painful red eye with 
photophobia and watering. VA may be i and 
the eyelids swollen. Keratitis can be infective, 


28 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













RED EYE 


252 


Differential diagnosis 



Fig. 28.3 Fore gn body. (From Atkinson P, Kendall R, Rensburg LV. Emergency Medicine, 1st edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, 2010.) 



Fig 28.4 Subconjunctival haemorrhage. (From Scully 
C Medical Problems in Dentistry, 6th edn. Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone, 2010.) 


e.g. viral (herpes simplex infection can produce 
corneal ulcers with a characteristic dendritic 
branching pattern), bacterial, fungal, amoebic or 
parasitic; environmental, e.g. exposure, ultraviolet 
(as in snow blindness or welder’s arc); chemi¬ 
cal; traumatic or due to contact lens wearing; 
the main risk factor for keratitis is contact lens 
use Keratitis, if untreated or severe, can lead 
to sight-threatening complications. 

Acute iritis (anterior uveitis) 

Inflammation of the iris, which is often recurrent 
(Fig. 28.6), occurs in young and middle-aged 


patients and may be associated with systemic 
diseases including seronegative spondyloarthropa¬ 
thies, inflammatory bowel disease, rheumatoid 
disease, SLE, sarcoid, HIV, etc. Presents with 
(usually unilateral) eye redness, typically ciliary or 
limbal (at the junction of the cornea and sclera), 
blurred vision/JA/A watering, photophobia (experi¬ 
enced when a light is shone into the affected eye 
and also the normal eye) and pain. Pain may be 
aggravated by reading or close work. The pupil 
is commonly small and irregular. 

Episcleritis/scleritis 

In episcleritis there is localized inflammation of 
the episclera (which lies between the conjunctiva 
and the sclera) (Fig. 28.7). Pain is usually mild 
and there is redness and watering and a nodule 
may be seen or felt by the patient. Scleritis is a 
more serious localized inflammation of the sclera 
(Fig. 28.8). Pain is a dominant feature and is 
more severe than with episcleritis and it is often 
recurrent. It responds poorly to analgesics, is 
worse with eye movements and can radiate to 
the periorbital region, forehead, temple and jaw. 
Both conditions are associated with autoimmune 
diseases and rheumatoid arthritis. iVA is unlike y 
in episcleritis but present in up to 20% with 
scleritis. 

Acute angle-closure glaucoma 

A sight-threatening ophthalmic emergency 
caused by sudden blockage of aqueous humour 
leading to TTTintraocular pressure (Fig. 28.9). 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










RED EYE 


Differential diagnosis 


253 



Fig. 28.5 Senile entropion of the lower lid. (From Douglas G, Nicol F, Robertson C. Macleod’s Clinical Examination, 
13th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2013.) 



Fig. 28.6 Iritis (anterior uveitis). (From Swartz MH. 
Textbook of Physical Diagnosis: History and Examination, 
6th edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2009.) 



Fig. 28.8 Scleritis. (From Kanski JJ. Clinical Diagnosis in 
Ophthalmology, 1st edn. St Louis: Mosby, 2006.) 


Middle-aged/elderly, long-sighted patients with 
shallow anterior chambers are at particular risk 
Pupil dilation can precipitate the condition so 
the onset may be more common in the evening 
and be precipitated by sympathomimetic, 
anticholinergic and other drugs. 



Fig. 28.7 Episcleritis. (From Rutter P. Community 
Pharmacy, 2nd edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2009.) 



Fig. 28.9 Acute angle-closure glaucoma. Arrows show 
dilated conjunctival vessels at corneal edge. Note hazy 
cornea (From Roberts JR, Fledges JR. Clinical Procedures in 
Emergency Medicine, 5th edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2010) 

Presentation is with acute, usually unilateral, 
severe eye pain with redness, -fVA, seeing halos 
around lights, nausea and vomiting, a cloudy 
cornea and a fixed, mid-dilated non-reactive, 
often oval-shaped, pupil. The globe feels ‘hard’ 
on (gentle) palpation through the eyelid. 


28 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 














RED EYE 


Overview 


Eye examination (see clinical tool) 


1 Is eye redness bilateral? 



downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





























































RED EYE 


255 


Step-by-step assessment 


1 Is the eye redness bilateral? 

A foreign body or trauma and acute glaucoma 
are usually unilateral. Conjunctivitis often starts 
unilaterally and then becomes bilateral. Iritis 
and keratitis can be bilateral although are more 
commonly unilateral. 

Allergic conjunctivitis is almost always bilateral; 
it is often seasonal, worse in the morning, itchy 
and there may be a history of atopy. 

Viral and bacterial conjunctivitis cannot be 
reliably differentiated based on clinical features; 
however, a watery discharge is more commonly 
seen with viral infection and a mucopurulent 
discharge with bacterial infection. Severe purulent 
discharge is common in gonococcal infection. 
Take conjunctival swabs for culture and sensitivity 
and to guide antibiotic/antiviral therapy. 



Fig. 28 10 Dendritic conjunctival ulcer. Fluorescein 
staining showing branching dendritic ulcer. (From Douglas 
G Nicol F, Robertson C. Macleod’s Clinical Examination, 
13th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2013.) 


2 


Abnormality of eyelashes, eyelid 
or eye closure? 


Check the position of the lid margins and the 
position of the lashes. The appearances of 
ectropion, entropion and trichiasis are usually 
obvious. Fluorescein staining may be present if 
the lashes have rubbed on the cornea. 

Bell’s palsy commonly presents with unilateral 
mouth droop and an inability to close the eye 
on the affected side. Differentiate from acute 
stroke as the forehead is not spared (patient 
is unable to wrinkle forehead). Bell’s palsy can 
cause eye redness because of drying and/or 
corneal abrasion/ulceration and temporary taping 
at night can help prevent exposure keratitis and 
corneal ulceration, in blepharitis the lid margins/ 
lashes are inflamed and crusty. 


3 


Does the cornea stain with fluorescein? 


Examine carefully for fluorescein staining and 
foreign bodies as described (see Clinical tool). 
Infective causes of keratitis and corneal ulceration 
can be rapidly sight-threatening and may be 
caused by viral, bacterial, fungal or amoebic 
infection. Herpes simplex virus infection may 
produce characteristic dendritic staining of the 
cornea (Fig. 28.10). In addition to examining the 
cornea with fluorescein staining for ulceration 
look for cloudiness or frank pus (hypopyon) in 
the anterior chamber; seek urgent specialist 
ophthalmological review regarding confirmation of 


the diagnosis and antimicrobial/antivi al therapy. 
Many foreign bodies can be simply removed 
with a cotton bud. Embedded metallic corneal 
foreign bodies require specialist review for 
removal and treatment of associated ‘rust-rings'. 
A history consistent with penetrating injury or of 
hammering/grinding mandates specialist review 
and imaging. 


4 


Is the pupil larger in the red eye? 


Suspect acute angle-closure glaucoma in any 
patient with periorbital pain, blurred vision/visual 
defect and a mid-dilated non-reactive pupil The 
pain is usually severe and may be mistaken for 
other causes of severe headache e.g migraine 
or subarachnoid haemorrhage. Similarly, the 
associated nausea/vomiting/abdominal pain may 
lead to a misdiagnosis of gastroenteritis. The 
decreased VA may be profound, e.g. detection 
of hand movements only. The cornea is usually 
cloudy and the pupil irregular and unreactive. 

Acute angle-closure is a medical emergency, 
any time delay in diagnosis and treatment may 
compromise sight drastically. Get emergency 
ophthalmological advice and review. Keep the 
patient supine if possible and do not cover the eye. 
Analgesics and anti-emetics may be indicated 


28 


5 


Is photophobia present? 


Photophobia indicates iritis or corneal epithelial 
disturbance. Ask about previous similar episodes 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
















RED EYE 


Step-by-step assessment 


(common in iritis) and underlying systemic 
conditions (e g. ankylosing spondylitis, reactive 
arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, connec¬ 
tive tissue disorders) known to be associated 
with iritis or scleritis. Cloudiness or hypopyon 
of the anterior chamber may be present. Get 
emergency ophthalmological review. 


6 


Severe pain/tenderness? 


Consider scleritis if the red eye is associated with 
severe pain (present in >80% of cases) or is very 
tender. Typically the redness will be localized 
but in severe cases it can involve most of the 
sclera. If suspected refer urgently for specialist 
assessment. 


7 


Is the eye redness localized? 


Diagnose subconjunctival haemorrhage if there is 
a localized region of redness with no associated 
symptoms (except possibly mild dryness) and 
normal appearances of the surrounding con¬ 
junctiva. Suspect episcleritis if there is segmental 
redness associated with mild pain, eye watering 
or injection of the adjacent vessels. Consider 
scleritis if there is localized redness associated 
with reduced VA or pain that radiates to the 
periorbital region, forehead, temple or jaw. 


8 


Consider other causes ( x 28.1) 


Infective conjunctivitis may be unilateral, particu¬ 
larly in the early stages; consider the diagnosis 
if there is associated discharge and no other 


Box 28.1 Extraocular causes for a red eye 


• Orbital cellulitis 

• Cavernous sinus thrombosis 

• Carotid-cavernous fistula 

• Cluster headache 


Box 28.2 Features suggestive of a benign cause 
for a red eye 


• Pupils exhibit normal size and reactivity 

• Normal VA (NB: occasionally a central corneal 
abrasion can reduce visual acuity) 

• Clear cornea 

• Clear anterior chamber 

• No proptosis 

• Eyeball not tender on palpation 

• Normal extraocular eye movements 


concerning features, e.g. photophobia or reduced 
VA. Though usually localized, both scleritis and 
episcleritis may cause diffuse eye redness. 
Reconsider the possibility of acute angle closure 
glaucoma if there are any suggestive features, 
e.g. cloudy cornea, severe orbital/periorbital pain 
or reports of seeing halos around objects. In the 
absence of a definite diagnosis, Box 28.2 lists 
features that would point to a benign underlying 
cause. Irrespective of the suspected diagnosis, 
get emergency Ophthalmology review if there 
is decreased VA, severe pain or photophobia. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

















This page intentionally left blank 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 




Scrotal swelling 


Most causes of scrotal swelling are benign, but 
germ cell tumours are a leading cause of malig¬ 
nancy in young men whilst testicular torsion and 
strangulated herniae are surgical emergencies. 
It is important to ascertain whether the scrotal 
swelling arises from within the scrotum or from 
outside (inguinal hernia). 

Indirect inguinal hernia 

Inguinal hernia (Fig. 29.1) may occur at any age 
but is increasingly common from middle age and 
is the most frequent cause of scrotal swelling. 
Herniated bowel passes through the inguinal ring 
and may descend into the scrotal sac. Left-sided 
hernias may contain the sigmoid colon. As the 
swelling arises from the abdominal cavity, it is not 
possible to ‘get above’ it Typically, the swelling 
is more prominent on standing, associated with 
a cough impulse and can be pushed back into 
the abdomen (‘reduced’). A non-reducible or 
‘incarcerated’ hernia may lead to bowel obstruc¬ 
tion or strangulation with ischaemia. 

Scrotal swellings 

Scrotal swellings may arise from either the con¬ 
tents of the scrotum or the skin of the scrotum. 
Abnormalities of the contents should be divided 
into spermatic cord, epididymis and testicular 
pathologies. 

Testicular abnormalities 

Hydrocoele 

Hydrocoele (see Fig 29.1) is the most common 
cause of scrotal swelling, especially in older 
men. Fluid accumulates within the tunica 
vaginalis (analogous to the peritoneal space 
in the abdomen), producing a painless, cystic 
swelling that typically transilluminates. With 
substantial swelling, the underlying testes may 
be impalpable. Most cases are idiopathic, but 


some have an underlying inflammatory or, rarely, 
malignant process. 

Orchitis 

This may arise as a complication of epididymitis 
(epididymo-orchitis) or, with mumps (now rare 
due to vaccination), it presents with acute scrotal 
pain and swelling, over days rather than hours, 
often accompanied by fever, urinary symptoms 
and/or urethral discharge. There may be a tender, 
swollen (soft) epididymis/testis or a reactive 
hydrocoele. 

Testicular tumour 

These typically present as painless, irregular, firm 
testicular lumps. Non-seminomatous germ cell 
tumours (NSGCT) (see Fig. 29.1) are the most 
common malignancy amongst men aged 20-30 
years. These comprise yolk sac tumours, cho¬ 
riocarcinoma, mixed type or embryonal tumours. 
Seminomatous tumours present later in life and 
have a slightly less aggressive course. Scrotal 
USS confirms the diagnosis and CT thorax/ 
abdomen/pelvis is used in staging Tumours 
are very chemosensitive (platinum-based 
chemotherapy) and 5-year su vival is greater 
than 90% even if metastasis has occurred. 
The tumour markers alpha-fetoprotein (yolk sac 
tumours), beta-human chorionic gonadotropin 
(choriocarcinomas) and LDH (tumour burden) 
should be tested Suspected testicular cancer 
requires urgent inpatient management due to the 
very rapid progression of these tumour types. 

Torsion of the testis 

Twisting of the testis may compromise its own 
blood supply; initially impeding venous ou flow 
until the pressure in the testis reached mean 
arterial pressure and arterial inflow is then 
occluded. Acute, severe, unilateral testicular 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 











SCROTAL SWELLING 


Differential diagnosis 


259 


Normal 


Hydrocoele 



Fig. 29.1 Common causes of 
scrotal swelling. 



downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


















SCROTAL SWELLING 


Differential diagnosis 

pain is the dominant presenting symptom, 
often accompanied by nausea and vomiting. 
On examination there may be a red, swollen, 
exquisitely tender hemiscrotum (often too tender 
to palpate), with the testis lying in a high posi¬ 
tion due to shortening of the spermatic cord. 
Patients are typically young adolescent males but 
consider torsion in all acute scrotal presentations. 
Suspected torsion mandates immediate surgical 
correction (de-torsion and pexy), as any delay 
threatens testicular viability. 


Epididymis abnormalities 

Epididymo-orchitis 

Inflammation of the epididymis ± testis (see 
Fig. 29 1) is usually due to sexually transmitted 
infection (mainly chlamydia and gonorrhoea) in 
younger men, and urinary tract infection (UTI) 
in older men. Acute epididymo-orchitis may be 
difficult to distinguish clinically from torsion. 

Epididymal cyst 

These are common, benign, simple cysts arising 
from the head of the epididymis. They may be 
multiple or bilateral. They are palpable separately 
from the testis. Differential diagnosis includes 
hydrocele, spermatocoele (which is similar to 
an epididymal cyst but contains sperm) and 
haematocoele (collection of blood in the tunica 
vaginalis following trauma). Symptoms include a 
dragging or painful sensation due to the weight 
of the cyst. 


Spermatic cord abnormalities 
Varicocoele 

Varicocoeles, varicosities of the gonadal vessels 
and their tributaries (see Fig. 29.1), are the com¬ 
monest abnormalities of the spermatic cord. They 
typically present with a dragging sensation of the 
testis and feel like a ‘bag of worms’ on palpa¬ 
tion. Left-sided varicocoeles may be caused by 
outflow obstruction of the left renal vein due to 


renal tumours (e.g. tumour thrombus of renal 
cell carcinoma). 

Other spermatic cord pathologies 

Other abnormalities uncommonly include lipomas 
of the cord (usually identified whilst undertaking 
an inguinal hernia repair) and, rarely, adeno- 
myoma and liposarcoma of the cord. 

Abnormalities of the scrotal skin 

Scrotal wall oedema 

This is the most common abnormality of the 
scrotal skin, presenting as thickened, indurated 
skin, usually as a result of congestive cardiac 
fa lure or other causes of peripheral oedema. 
Lymphatic filariasis (Wuchereria bancrofti [90%] 
Brugia malayi, and Brugia timori ) causes oedema 
of the legs and genitals due to parasitic inva¬ 
sion of the pelvic lymphatics. Treatment is with 
anti-parasitic agents such as mebendazole. 
The scrotum may rarely become enormously 
enlarged, for example necessitating carriage 
of the scrotum in a wheelbarrow. In instances 
such as these, debulking scrotal surgery is 
required. 

Cellulitis/Fournier’s gangrene 

Fournier s gangrene refers to necrotizing fasciitis 
of the genitalia, perineum or perianal region; it is 
a life-threatening emergency requiring immedi¬ 
ate surgical debridement and broad spectrum 
antibiotics. Infection is typically polymicrobial with 
both aerobic and anaerobic bacteria, including 
streptococcus, staphylococcus, enterobacte- 
riacea and Clostridium species. The condition 
tends to arise in older patients, with diabetes as 
the main risk factor. Intense genital pain and 
tenderness is the clinical hallmark and, impor¬ 
tantly, the overlying inflammatory skin changes 
(erythema, oedema) may be relatively mild or 
even absent in the early stages. In advanced 
disease there may be subcutaneous crepitation 
or frank gangrene. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















SCROTAL SWELLING 


Differential diagnosis 


Clinical tool 

Examination of the scrotum 


Testicular examination 

• Obtain consent and offer a chaperone. 

• With the patient standing, then supine, inspect the 
scrotum for redness, swelling and position of the 
testes. 

• Wearing gloves, palpate each testis in turn between 
forefinger and thumb; identify the spermatic cord and 
epididymis and assess any irregularity, swelling or 
tenderness. 

• Use your fingers to see whether you can feel above the 
swelling (Fig. 29.2); if so, it originates in the scrotum. 


• If you cannot 'get above’ the swelling, check for a 
cough impulse and attempt to reduce the swelling by 
very gently 'massaging' it back into the abdomen. 

• Determine whether the swelling transilluminates using 
a pen-torch. 

• In patients with an acutely painful scrotum or tender/ 
inflamed scrotal swelling, check the cremasteric 
reflex. With the patient’s thigh abducted and externally 
rotated, stroke the upper medial aspect - normally, the 
testis on that side will rise briskly. 


Fingers can ‘get above’ mass Fingers cannot ‘get above’ mass 




Fig. 29.2 Assessing the origin of a scrotal swelling. (From Douglas G, Nicol F, Robertson C. Macleod's Clinical 
Examination, 12th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2009.) 


29 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



















SCROTAL SWELLING 


262 “ 

Overview 


Full clinical assessment + testicular examination 


Inflammation present and 
1 confined to scrotal / surrounding 
skin? 


Yes 


-► Cellulitis / Fournier’s gangrene 




Urgent surgical 


No 


2 Isolated scrotal skin oedema? 


Yes 


Dependent oedema / filariasis 


No 


Painful and / or inflamed scrotal 

Yes 

Torsion / epididymo-orchitis / 

contents? 


strangulated hernia 


-► 


Urgent surgical 
review 


No 


Yes 


4 Unable to feel above swelling? -► Likely inguinal hernia or varicocoele 


No 


5 Transilluminates? 


Yes 


Likely hydrocoele 


-► 


Consider USS to 
delineate 
underlying scrotal 
structures 


No 


6 Any palpable swelling? 


Yes 


-► Scrotal USS - 


Tumour / spermatocoele / other 


No 


Reassure; consider follow-up evaluation 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













































SCROTAL SWELLING 


Step-by-step assessment 


Inflammation present and confined to 
scrotal/surrounding skin? 

Consider Fournier’s gangrene in any patient with 
inflammatory skin changes affecting the scrotal 
skin (+/- surrounding perineal/perianal regions). 
Seek immediate surgical review if any of the 
following are present: 

• severe pain or tenderness (especially if 
disproportionate to skin appearances) 

• dusky appearance of skin, fluctuation, 
crepitation or gangrene 

• systemically unwell e.g. sepsis 
(see Ch. 14), shock (see Ch. 30). 

In the absence of these features, consider 
scrotal ce lulitis but monitor frequently and have a 
very low threshold for surgical review, particularly 
in older or diabetic patients. 


2 


Isolated scrotal skin oedema? 


In patients with scrotal wall oedema, look 
for evidence of generalized oedema, ascites, 
TJVP and/or pleural effusions. TJVP indicates 
systemic venous congestion and strongly 
suggests a cardiogenic cause, e.g. cardiac 
failure or severe pulmonary hypertension/cor 
pulmonale. Also consider a cardiac cause in 
patients with a significant cardiac history (e.g. 
previous myocardial infarction, valve disease, 
cardiomyopathy), severe chronic lung disease 
or exertional/nocturnal dyspnoea. Check U+E 
and serum albumin to exclude severe renal 
failure/hypoalbuminaemia and consider ECG 
and or cardiology review. Suspect filariasis if 
other causes are excluded and the clinical history 
is suggestive, e.g. from endemic area - seek 
expert advice. 


3 


Painful and/or inflamed scrotal contents? 


Suspect a strangulated hernia if the swelling 
arises from the inguinal canal (see above), is 
not reducible (or severe pain persists despite 
reduction) and is tender, hot and red, or 
associated with systemic toxicity. Seek urgent 
surgical review, as there is a risk of bowel 
ischaemia. 

If the swelling arises from the scrotum (or 
pain prohibits examination) and is painful, tender, 
inflamed and/or accompanied by acute severe 
unilateral scrotal pain, you MUST exclude 


testicular torsion. There may be associated 
features as below: 

• nausea or vomiting 

• pain duration <24 hours 

• high position of the testis 

• abnormal cremasteric reflex. 


Consider initial investigation with scrotal USS 
if the clinical presentation suggests an alterna¬ 
tive diagnosis such as epididymo-orchitis, e.g. 
urethral discharge, tenderness localized to 
epididymis, age >30 years and none of the above 
are present. In all other cases, arrange immediate 
surgical review without delay for imaging. 


4 


Unable to feel above swelling? 


If it is not possible to palpate above the swelling, 
the swelling is likely to originate from outside 
the scrotum. 

Suspect a varicocoele if it feels like a ‘bag of 
worms’; confirm with scrotal USS and exclude 
underlying renal cell carcinoma f sudden onset, 
unilateral and left-sided or not reducible in supine 
position. 

Otherwise, suspect an inguinal hernia - look 
for bowel obstruction (p. 32) and arrange urgent 
surgical review if it is non-reducible. If easily 
reducible, refer for outpatient surgical evaluation. 


5 


Transilluminates? 


Suspect hydrocoele if there is a painless swelling 
of the scrotum that transilluminates. (Epididymal 
cyst and spermatocoeles also transilluminate and 
are part of the differential.) Consider USS to assess 
for testicular abnormality (e.g. tumour, inflamma¬ 
tory mass) if there is tenderness systemic upset 
or difficulty in palpating the testicular structures. 


6 


Any palpable swelling? 


USS is the investigation of choice in scrotal swell¬ 
ing and differentiates malignant tumours from 
other masses, e.g. spermatocoele, with a high 
degree of accuracy. Arrange scrotal USS in any 
patient with a detectable scrotal lump or swelling. 
Testicular tumours grow extremely rapidly so 
admit for urgent testicular USS and urology 
referral +/- tumour markers and CT stag ng if 
there is a high suspicion of malignancy, e.g. 
painless testicular lump in a young man. Refer 
to Urology in any case for further assessment/ 
treatment if the diagnosis remains uncertain. 


29 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



















Shock is a clinical syndrome characterized 
by inadequate systemic and specific organ 
perfusion. It is recognized by features of tissue 
hypoperfusion (Box 30.1), usually with hypoten¬ 
sion; however, BP may be maintained until the 
advanced stages of shock, particularly in young, 
fit individuals. 

Three processes may cause shock: hypo- 
volaemia, pump failure (cardiogenic shock) 
and vasodilatation (distributive shock). These 
processes can be difficult to distinguish, as 
components of the circulation are interdependent 
and different mechanisms often coexist, e.g. 
vasodilatation, myocardial suppression and 
relative hypovolaemia may occur simultaneously 
in sepsis. 

Many presentations in this book may be com¬ 
plicated by shock but here shock is considered 
as the primary presenting problem detected on 
routine observa ions or on targeted examination 
of a severely or non-specifically unwell patient. 


Hypovolaemic shock 

Decreased intravascular volume reduces 
cardiac filling pressures and cardiac output A 
compensatory increase in heart rate and systemic 
vascular resistance occurs. Characteristic find¬ 
ings are iJVP, tachycardia, -Ipulse volume and 
cool, clammy peripheries. Tachycardia may be 
absent in patients on rate-limiting medications, 
e.g. beta-blockers, calcium channel antagonists. 

Haemorrhage 

Blood loss is not always visible; it may be left 
at the scene of an accident or concealed within 
surgical drains. The pelvis, retroperitoneum, 
peritoneum, thorax and thighs can accommodate 
several litres of extravascular blood. In addition 
to trauma, important causes include Gl bleed 
(see Ch. 15), ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm 
(AAA) and ectopic pregnancy. 


Other fluid losses 

Hypovolaemia may result from burns, diarrhoea, 
vomiting, polyuria or from prolonged dehydration, 
particularly in the elderly. Significant volumes of 
fluid may also be lost into the ‘third space’, e.g. 
in conditions such as bowel obstruction and 
acute pancreatitis. 

Cardiogenic shock 

Cardiac disorders may cause valvular or myocar¬ 
dial dysfunction, and extracardiac disorders may 
impede cardiac inflow or outflow (also known as 
‘obstructive’ shock). Peripheral signs are similar 
to those of hypovolaemia but the JVP is usually 
raised (reflecting right heart failure) and there may 
be pulmonary oedema (reflecting left heart failure) 
as well as features specific to the underlying 
cause. ECG is often diagnostic. 

Myocardial infarction 

Shock may result from large infarcts, particularly 
in the anterior wall; from smaller infarcts in 
patients with pre-existing ventricular impairment; 
or from structural complications of myocardial 
infarction (Ml), such as papillary muscle rupture, 
ventricular septal defect or tamponade. 

I Left ventricular dysfunction 

without infarction 

This includes tachy- or bradyarrhythmias, acute 
myocarditis and end-stage cardiomyopathy. 

Valve disorders 

Examples of valve disorders include prosthetic 
valve dysfunction, endocarditis and critical aortic 
stenosis. 

Tension pneumothorax 

The urgency of treatment mandates a clinical 
diagnosis. Typical findings include increasing 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 












SHOCK 


respiratory distress, ■J.ipsilateral breath sounds, 
tachycardia and hypotension. Tracheal deviation 
is often absent. Immediate decompression is 
essential. 

Cardiac tamponade 

Accumulation of fluid in the pericardial space 
(pericardial effusion) impedes cardiac filling. As 
little as 200 ml_ of fluid may cause tamponade 
if accumulation is rapid, e.g. trauma, aortic 
dissection, myocardial rupture. Hypotension, 
tachycardia, tJVP and pulsus paradoxus are 
usually present. The e may also be muffled heart 
sounds, Kussmaul’s sign (a ‘paradoxical’ rise in 
JVP on inspiration) and small ECG complexes. 
ECG will confirm the presence of an effusion, 
provide evidence of cardiac compromise and 
guide therapeutic drainage. 

Pulmonary embolism 

Massive pulmonary embolism (PE) typically 
presents with sudden onset of chest pain, 
dyspnoea and hypoxia with shock. The JVP 
is usually elevated and the ECG may show 
features of right heart strain. In critically unwell 
patients, bedside echocardiography may assist 
the diagnosis. 

Distributive shock 

In distributive shock, peripheral vasodilatation 
causes a drop in systemic vascular resistance 
and ‘relative hypovolaemia’ (Tsize of vascular 
space without corresponding increase in 
ntravascular volume). A compensatory rise in 
cardiac output is insufficient to maintain blood 
pressure. Tachycardia and hypotension are often 
accompanied by warm peripheries and Tpulse 
volume. 

I Systemic inflammatory response 

syndrome/sepsis 

Distributive shock may complicate sepsis (p. 141) 
or non-infective conditions associated with a 


Differential diagnosis 

major systemic inflammatory response, e.g. acute 
pancreatitis. Features of relative hypovolaemia 
may predominate initially. An arterial or venous 
lactate of 4 mmol/L or greater has been associ¬ 
ated with increased mortality in sepsis 

Anaphylaxis 

This produces a very rapid onset of broncho- 
constriction, widespread erythematous rash 
and severe distributive shock. A precipitant 
(foodstuffs, drugs - particularly antibiotics, insect 
stings) may be identified. A related problem is 
transfusion reaction; ABO incompatibility may 
present with shock as the only initial sign, particu¬ 
larly in unconscious or sedated patients. In severe 
anaphylaxis, severe shock or even cardiac arrest 
may occur without other symptoms or signs. 

Drug causes 

Antihypertensives and anaesthetic agents 
(particularly epidural and spinal anaesthesia) 
may cause distributive shock through excessive 
peripheral vasodilatation. 

Adrenal crisis 

Glucocorticoid deficiency may result in distribu¬ 
tive shock, particularly during acute stress, e.g. 
infection, surgery. 

Neurogenic shock 

Neurogenic shock is a rare form of distribu¬ 
tive shock associated with direct injury to the 
sympathetic fibres that control vascular tone from 
a traumatic spinal injury. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 













SHOCK 


266 “ 

Overview 


ABODE, ECG, ABG 


Clinical features of shock (Box 30.1)? 


No 


-► Incipient shock OR consider alternative causes 
of organ dysfunction / hypotension 


Yes 


Obvious bleeding source? 


Yes 


See Box 15.1 

"► Likely hypovolaemic shock - -► and tmat cause 


No 


„ Cause that requires immediate specific 
treatment? 


Y es Treat and 
reassess 


Confirm diagnosis 


No 


Evidence of cardiac failure? 


Yes 


Urgent echo and 

Likely cardiogenic shock - -► Cardiology opinion 
to establish cause 


No 


5 Ongoing assessment and treatment of shock physiology during diagnostic work-up (Fig. 30.1) 


Suspect pelvic or intra-abdominal 
pathology? 


No 


SIRS criteria or immunocompromise? 


No 


Y es Urgent surgical 

— — -» opinion -► 

± abdominal USS/CT 


Acute surgical cause 


Yes Likely systemic inflammatory 
response syndrome / sepsis 


-► Seek source 


8 Suspect adrenal insufficiency? 


No 


Yes 


Treat and 
-+■ reassess; -► 


check random cortisol 


Acute adrenal crisis 


9 Distributive or cardiogenic pattern? 


No 


-► Likely hypovolaemic shock - -► Identify cause 


Yes 


Further diagnostic work-up guided by shock physiology pattern with invasive monitoring. Involve ICU. 
Arrange echo and cardiology input if suspect cardiogenic shock 
Maintain suspicion of sepsis; consider rarer causes e g. neurogenic shock 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



























































SHOCK 


267 


Step-by-step assessment 


1 Clinical features of shock (see Box 30.1)? 

Use the features in Box 30.1 to identify shock. 
Tissue hypoperfusion is the defining feature 
Absolute values of HR and BP are less informa¬ 
tive than monitoring of trends over time. Some 
patients may maintain BP within normal limits 
despite organ dysfunction, but consider local 
pathology if there is single organ dysfunction, e.g. 
oliguria, without clear evidence of haemodynamic 
compromise. If the patient falls short of the criteria 
in Box 30.1 but you suspect significant circula¬ 
tory compromise, pursue a working diagnosis 
of ‘incipient shock' and continue through the 
diagnostic pathway. 


2 


Obvious bleeding source? 


Where shock arises from acute haemorrhage, the 
initial aims of treatment are to minimize further 
blood loss and restore adequate circulating 
volume. Assess resuscitation requirements and 
monitor response to treatment as described in 
Box 15.1 , page 153. In patients with traumatic 
haemorrhage, always consider the possibility of 
an additional cause of shock, e.g. tamponade, 
tension pneumothorax. 


3 


Cause that requires immediate 
specific treatment? 


in some cases, specific interventions to reverse 
the underlying cause of shock offer the only 
effective treatment (e.g. decompression of a 
tension pneumothorax) and take precedence 
over further investigation or supportive measures 
(Table 30.1). Most will be identified and treated 


Box 30.1 Clinical features of shock 


Haemodynamic 

• Systolic BP <100 mmHg or a drop of >40 mmHg 
from baseline 

• Pulse >100/min 

Tissue hypoperfusion 

• Skin: capillary refill time >2 sec or cold/pale/mottled 
extremities 

• Renal: oliguria (<0.5 mLVkg/hr) or Tserum creatinine 
(acute) 

• CNS: GCS <15, confusion or agitation 

• Global: Tlactate (in the absence of hypoxaemia) 

>2 of the above indicate shock 


as part of the ABODE assessment (p. 8). If one 
of these disorders is suspected but the diagnosis 
remains uncertain, seek urgent expert assistance, 
e.g. Cardiology review. 


4 


Evidence of cardiac failure? 


Pulmonary oedema suggests cardiogenic shock. 
The most common cause is severe let ventricular 
dysfunction from acute Ml. Perform (serial) ECG to 
look for evidence of infarction or ischaemia (see 
Box 6.1 , p. 51). Arrange bedside ECG to assess 
left ventricular function and exclude mechanical 
causes (especially acute mitral regurgitation). 

Patients without pulmonary oedema but 
with TjVP ± peripheral oedema may have a 
cardiogenic component to shock. Those with 
right ventricular infarction (suspect with inferior 
or posterior Ml in the previous 72 hours) chronic 
right heart failure or tricuspid regurgitation may be 
inadequately filled despite TJVP and will respond 
to fluid challenge. Otherwise, echocardiography is 
mandatory to look for evidence of right ventricular 
dysfunction, tamponade and PE. 

Patients with cardiogenic shock require 
invasive monitoring and specialist interventions; 
if appropriate, urgent Cardiology and ICU referral 
is essential. 


5 


Ongoing assessment and treatment 
of shock physiology during diagnostic 
work-up ( ) 


In the absence of obvious haemorrhage, major 
cardiac dysfunction or a rapidly reversible cause 
of shock, the next step is to initiate treatment 
and assess response. As shown in Fig. 30.1, 
the effect of repeated fluid challenge on haemo¬ 
dynamic variables and tissue perfusion helps to 
delineate the mechanism(s) of shock and guide 
further resuscitation and treatment. This process 
should be carried out in parallel with continued 
evaluation for a specific underlying cause. Beware 
concealed bleeding. Haemorrhagic shock is fre¬ 
quently missed in the early stages. Haemoglobin/ 
haematocrit levels may be misleading as they 
are usually normal in acute haemorrhage, and 
only fall following fluid replacement. Lactate 
clearance (change in blood lactate levels over 
time) is a proxy for monitoring response to treat¬ 
ment. Bedside USS of the inferior vena cava 
(IVC) and its degree of collapsibility has also 


30 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 




















SHOCK 


Step-by-step assessment 


Table 301 Rapidly reversible causes of shock 

Reversible cause 

Suspect if 

Test to confirm 

Specific intervention 

Tension pneumothorax 

Respiratory distress/tracheal 
deviation/unilateral hyper¬ 
resonance, 4-breath sounds 

Nil - treat immediately 

Needle aspiration 

Tachyarrhythmia 

Ventricular tachycardia (VT) or 
supraventricular tachycardia 
(SVT) >150 bpm 

Nil - treat immediately 

DC cardioversion 

Bradyarrhyth m ia 

3rd degree atrioventricular 
block or HR <40 bpm 

Nil - treat immediately 

Atropine, adrenaline, 
external or 
transvenous pacing 

Anaphylaxis 

Respiratory distress, stridor, 
wheeze, angioedema, rash, 
precipitant 

Nil - treat immediately 

Adrenaline, IV fluid 

ST elevation myocardial 
infarction (Ml) 

Chest pain, ECG criteria 
(see Box 6.1, p. 51) 

Nil - treat immediately 

Primary angioplasty 
or thrombolysis 

Pulmonary embolism 

Dyspnoea, hypoxia (especially 
with clear lung fields), chest 
pain, TJVP risk factors, ECG 
changes (p. 58) 

CTPA if stable; urgent 
ECG if unstable; nil if 
peri-arrest 

Thrombolysis 

Cardiac tamponade 

TJVP, pulsus paradoxus, 
small QRS complexes on ECG 

ECG 

Pericardiocentesis 


Corrected hypovolaemia: 

Look for underlying causes, e.g. blood loss 
• Monitor closely for recurrent shock 

Yes 


Give fluid challenge 
e.g. 250 mL over 2-5 min 




Absolute or relative hypovolaemia: 

• A brief, transient ft in JVP/CVP, BP 
urine output suggests redistribution of 
fluid or ongoing fluid loss 

• If no response or a deterioration, 
larger fluid challenges may be 
indicated 

• Consider CVP monitoring if JVP difficult 
to interpret, known LV impairmen or 
shock persists after >3 LIV fluid 


Shock resolved? 


No 


Sustained 1} in JVP/CVP 
to high / normal? 


Yes 



Pulmonarv oedema? Cardiogenic +/or distributive shock: 

y ' • Cool peripheries, thready pulses and/or 


Yes / 



Cardiogenic shock: 

• Obtain urgent cardiology and ICU 
input to optimise monitoring and 
identify / treat the underlying cause 


poor LV function on echocardiography 
favour cardiogenic 

• Warm peripheries, bounding pulses 
and/or good LV function on 
echocardiography favour distributive 

• Invasive monitoring usually required to 
accurately define shock physiology and 
guide use of inotropes / vasopressors 
request urgent ICU assistance 


Fig. 30.1 Shock physiology: The cycle of assessment. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 














been shown to be useful in both diagnosing 
shock type and guiding response to treatment. 
In a spontaneously breathing, previously healthy 
person, variations in pleural cavity pressure with 
breathing are transmitted to the right atrium. 
This leads to a reduction of about 50% in 
IVC diameter on inspiration. Volume depleted 
spontaneously breathing patients will have a 
reduction of greater than 50% sometimes leading 
to complete collapse of the IVC on inspiration. 


6 


Suspect pelvic or intra-abdominal 
pathology? 


Request urgent surgical review if you suspect 
acute abdominal or pelvic pathology. AAA or 
ruptured ectopic pregnancy require immediate 
intervention. Suspect ruptured AAA in patients 
>60 years, those with known AAA, a pulsatile 
abdominal mass or sudden-onset, severe 
abdominal/back; perform an immediate bedside 
USS, withhold fluid resuscitation if the patient is 
fully conscious and contact a vascular surgeon 
as an emergency. 

Suspect ruptured ectopic pregnancy in any 
woman of child-bearing age with recent-onset 
lower abdominal pain, shoulder-tip pain or 
PV bleeding; perform an immediate bedside 
urine pregnancy test and consider bedside 
transabdominal USS to look for free fluid. A 
more extensive scan to locate a pregnancy can 
be performed by the Gynaecology team if the 
patient is stable. Other pointers to an underlying 
surgical cause include severe abdominal pain 
+/- tenderness/guarding/peritonism, air under 
the diaphragm on CXR or Tamylase. Look for 
intestinal obstruction on abdominal X ray in 
patients with abdominal pain/distension and 
repeated vomiting. Request an urgent surgical 
review. See Chapter 4 for further details. 


7 


Evidence of infection/inflammation or 
predisposition to infection? 


Look for features of sepsis (p. 141). If present, 
perform a full septic screen, (Clinical tool, 


SHOCK 


Step by-step assessment 


269 


p. 142) to identify a likely source but do not 
delay antibiotics. Assume sepsis in any patient 
with immunocompromise until proven otherwise 
See ‘Surviving Sepsis’ guidelines (http:// 
www.survivingsepsis.org/GUIDELINES/Pages/ 
default. aspx). 


8 


Suspect adrenal insufficiency? 


Adrenal insufficiency is often overlooked, as 
many patients have fever and are assumed, at 
least initially, to have septic shock. Always 
consider the diagnosis and look for clinical/ 
biochemical features. Useful indicators include 
prominent Gl symptoms (almost always present 
but non-specific), pigmentation of recent scars, 
palmar creases and mucosal membranes, 
vitiligo, iNa + , Tl< + and hypoglycaemia. Even 
a blood glucose at the low end of normal 
(3.5-4.5 mmol/L) suggests an inadequate ‘stress 
response’. If you suspect adrenal insufficiency, 
send blood for a random cortisol level then treat 
with IV hydrocortisone without waiting for the 
results. A short ACTH (Synacthen) test may 
be helpful but takes 30 minutes to perform 
and should not delay empirical treatment in 
critically unwell patients. Remember that any 
patient taking systemic steroids for >3 months 
will have some adrenal suppression. 


9 


Distributive or cardiogenic pattern? 


Identify the presence of relative or absolute 
hypovolaemia (see Fig. 30.1). Look for con¬ 
cealed sources of haemorrhage dehydration 
(reduced skin turgor, dry mucous membranes) 
and causative/contributory factors, e.g. history of 
diarrhoea and vomiting, reduced intake, diuretics, 
antihypertensives. 

Check for ketonuria and metabolic acidosis to 
exclude diabetic ketoacidosis. If the response to 
IV fluids suggests a distributive or cardiogenic 
element, involve ICU, institute appropriate 
(invasive) monitoring and consider urgent 
echocardiography. 


30 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















-4 Transient loss of consciousness: 
I syncope and seizures 


Transient loss of consciousness (T-LOC) presents 
a particular diagnostic challenge. The event has 
usually resolved by the time of assessment and 
since critical elements of the history are unknown 
to the patient, witness accounts are crucial. Risk 
stratification of patients may identify those at 
risk of cardiac or arrhythmia-related syncope 
requiring admission for further investigation and 
those at low risk (often with a diagnosis of reflex 
or orthostatic syncope) who can be evaluated 
as outpatients. 

Syncope 

‘Syncope’ denotes T-LOC resulting from global 
cerebral hypoperfusion, typically associated 
with a BP <60 mmHg for >6 seconds. It is 
characterized by rapid onset, short duration 
and spontaneous comp ete recovery. 

Syncope can be divided into four aetiological 
subtypes: 

• Arrhythmia related - due to transient 
compromise of cardiac output by a 
tachy- or bradyarrhythmia, e.g. ventricular 
tachycardia, complete heart block. 

• Cardiac - due to structural heart 
disease, especially left ventricular outflow 
obstruction, e.g. severe aortic stenosis, 
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. 
Acute pulmonary embolism (PE) or aortic 
dissection may also cause syncope. 

• Orthostatic - due to failure of homeostatic 
maintenance of BP on standing, e.g. 


caused by antihypertensive medications or 
autonomic neuropathy. 

• Reflex (neurally mediated) - reflex 

vasodilatation and/or bradycardia occurs 
in response to a particular ‘trigger’, e.g. 
‘vasovagal’ or ‘carotid sinus’ syncope. 


Seizure 

Disordered electrical activity affecting the whole 
brain (‘generalized’ seizure) can lead to T-LOC. 
This may be primary or result from a focal (partial) 
seizure that spreads to the whole brain (second¬ 
ary generalization). In the absence of secondary 
generalization, partial seizures may cause altered 
consciousness (complex partial seizures) without 
T-LOC. Epilepsy is the tendency to have recurrent 
seizures. Factors that may provoke seizures in 
patients with epilepsy are shown in Box 31.1. 

Hypoglycaemia 

Hypoglycaemia may cause impairment of 
consciousness that resolves with prompt cor¬ 
rection of capillary blood glucose. Most cases 
are iatrogenic, from treatment of diabetes 
with insulin or sulphonylurea drugs. Causes of 
‘spontaneous’ hypoglycaemia include alcohol, 
liver failure, insulinoma and adrenal insufficiency. 

Functional disorders (apparent T-LOC) 

‘Pseudoseizure’ and ‘pseudosyncope' are 
terms used to describe episodes that resemble 
seizure and syncope respectively but do not 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










TRANSIENT LOSS OF CONSCIOUSNESS: SYNCOPE AND SEIZURES 


Differential diagnosis 


Box 31.1 Trigger factors for seizures 


• Alcohol excess or withdrawal 

• Recreational drug misuse 

• Sleep deprivation 

• Physical/mental exhaustion 

• Intercurrent infection 

• Metabolic disturbance (lNa + , J-Mg 2+ , 4-Ca 2+ , 
uraemia, liver failure) 

• Non-compliance with medication or drug interaction 

• Flickering lights 


have an underlying somatic mechanism, i.e. no 
epileptiform activity or cerebral hypoperfusion. 
They can present major diagnostic difficulty and 
may requ re specialist assessment. Features that 
may raise suspicion of a functional aetiology for 
symp oms over true loss of consciousness are 
shown in Box 31 .2. 

Other causes 

For clinical presentations not suggestive of 
either tonic-clonic seizure or syncope, consider 


Box 31.2 Atypical features in apparent T-LOC 


• Prolonged duration (>5 minutes) of episodes 

• Eyes closed during episode 

• Numerous attacks in single day 

• Purposeful movements during apparent period of 
T-LOC 

• Established diagnosis of other functional disorder, 
e.g. chronic fatigue syndrome 


rarer causes such as cataplexy, narcolepsy 
and atypical seizures, e.g. absence, as well 
as conditions which may mimic T-LOC, 
including falls, functional disorders, drug/ 
alcohol intoxication. Transient ischaemic 
attacks present with focal neurological signs 
and symptoms and very rarely cause T LOC. 
Concussion is a common cause of T-LOC 
associated with head trauma. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















TRANSIENT LOSS OF CONSCIOUSNESS: SYNCOPE AND SEIZURES 


Transient loss of consciousness: overview 



downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















































TRANSIENT LOSS OF CONSCIOUSNESS: SYNCOPE AND SEIZURES 


Transient loss of consciousness: step-by-step assessment 


1 Definite loss of consciousness? 

In the absence of a clear witness account this 

may be difficult to establish - ask the patient to 

recount the events in as much detail as possible. 

Assume T-LOC if: 

• a witness confirms a period of 
unresponsiveness 

• the patient describes ‘waking up' or 
‘coming to’ on the ground, especially if 
there is no recollection of falling 

• there are facial injuries (most conscious 
patients can protect their face as they fall). 

T-LOC is unlikely if: 

• there was no loss of postural tone 

• the patient recalls landing on the ground 

• a witness account suggests interaction 
with or awareness of the environment 
throughout the episode. 


Features of shock? 


Syncope may be a manifestation of major haemo¬ 
dynamic compromise, e.g. massive PE, severe 
Gl bleed. If you find evidence of shock (see Box 
30.1, p. 267) during the ABODE assessment, 
evaluate further as per Chapter 30. 


3 


Complete ecovery of consciousness? 


The diagnostic pathway below is appropriate only 
for a transient episode of loss of consciousness. 
If there is evidence of persistently -iGCS during 
the ABODE assessment, evaluate in the first 
instance as described in Chapter 7. 


4 


Documented CBG <3.0 mmol/L or strong 
clinical suspicion of hypoglycaemia? 


Attributing an episode of reduced consciousness 
to hypoglycaemia requires: 

• demonstration of low blood glucose in 
association with T-LOC 

• recovery with restoration of 
normoglycaemia. 

Corroborate a low CBG with a formal lab 
glucose measurement whenever feasible 
but do not wait for the result to initiate treatment. 
Patients may have had corrective treatment prior 
to assessment without a CBG, e.g. from ambu¬ 
lance crew. In these circumstances, suspect 
hypoglycaemia if the episode resolved with 


administration of carbohydrate/glucagon and was 
preceded by symptoms of autonomic activation 
(sweating, trembling, hunger)/neuroglycopenia 
(poor concentration, confusion, incoordination) 
or occurred in a patient taking insulin or a 
sulphonylurea. 


5 


Any red flag cardiac features 
(see Box 31 .3)? 


Always exclude a serious underlying cardiac 
cause for T-LOC if any of the features in Box 
31.3 is present. Continue through the diagnostic 
pathway but admit the patient to hospital and 
discuss with a cardiologist. 


>1 seizure feature (see Box 31 .4) OR 1 
seizure feature and no syncope features? 

Differentiating between seizure and syncope is 
a key step in the assessment process. Features 
that strongly suggest seizure are listed in Box 
31.4. Descriptions of ‘jerking , ‘twitching’ or 
‘fitting’ are unhelpful since ‘seizure-like’ move¬ 
ments may occur in up to 90% of syncopal 
episodes. In contrast to seizure, the abnormal 
movements in syncope are usually non-rhythmic 
and brief (<15 seconds). 


Box 31 3 Red flag cardiac features 


• T-LOC during exertion 

• Severe valvular heart disease, coronary artery 
disease or cardiomyopathy 

• Family history of unexplained premature sudden 
death 

• Previous ventricular arrhythmia or high risk for 
ventricular arrhythmia, e.g. prior Ml or ventricular 
surgery 

• Sustained or non-sustained ventricular tachycardia 
on telemetry 

• High-risk ECG abnormality: 

bifascicular or trifascicular block (see Fig. 31 .3) 
new T wave or ST segment changes (see Box 6.1 , 
p. 51) 

sinus bradycardia <50 bpm or sinus pause >3 
seconds 

second-degree AV block or complete heart block 

(see Figs 31.1 and 31 .2) 

evidence of pre-excitation (see Fig. 26.2, p. 233) 

marked QT interval prolongation, e.g. QTc >500 

milliseconds 

Brugada pattern: RBBB with ST elevation in leads 
V,-V 3 (see Fig. 31.5) 


31 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 





















TRANSIENT LOSS OF CONSCIOUSNESS: SYNCOPE AND SEIZURES 


Transient loss of consciousness: step-by-step assessment 


The episode of T-LOC is highly likely to have 
been a seizure if >1 of the features in Box 31,4 
are present. Seizure is also likely if any of these 
features are present, and there are no specific 
pointers to syncope (Box 31 .5). In both cases, 
proceed to ‘Seizure’ (p. 276). 


>1 syncope features (see Box 31 .5) and 
' no seizure features 

Suspect syncope if any of the features in Box 
31.5 and none of those in Box 31.4 are present 
- proceed to ‘Syncope’ (p. 278). 


features may be helpful: amnesia for events 
before and after the episode, and headache 
or aching muscles after the episode suggest 
a seizure diagnosis; previous episodes of 
pre-syncope, witnessed pallor during T-LOC, 
known cardiovascular disease and an abnormal 
ECG favour syncope. Urinary incontinence is 
not a useful discriminating feature. Consider a 
functional aetiology if atypical features are present 
(see Box 31 .2). Have a low threshold for specialist 
input if the cause remains unclear. 


8 


Likely seizure or syncope - make working 
diagnosis if possible. Consider functional 
cause if atypical features (see 3ox 31.2) 


Where differentiation between seizure and 
syncope is not straightforward, other clinical 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 









TRANSIENT LOSS OF CONSCIOUSNESS: SYNCOPE AND SEIZURES 


Transient loss of consciousness: step by-step assessment 


Box 31.4 Clinical features strongly suggestive 
of seizure 


• T LOC preceded by typical aura, e.g. unusual smell, 
'rising' sensation in abdomen, deja vu 

• A witness account of abnormal tonic-clonic limb 
movements that are: 

coarse and rhythmic 

maintained for >30 seconds (ask witness to 
demonstrate movements) 

• A witness account of head-turning to one side, 
unusual posturing, cyanosis or automatisms such as 
chewing or lip-smacking during the episode 

• Severely bitten, bleeding tongue or bitten lateral 
border of tongue 

• A prolonged period (>5 minutes) of confusion or 
drowsiness after the episode 


Box 31.5 Clinical features strongly suggestive 
of syncope 


• T-LOC preceded by chest pain, palpitation, 
dyspnoea, light-headedness or typical ‘pre-syncopal’ 
prodrome, e.g. lightheadedness, warmth, nausea, 
vomiting 

• T-LOC after standing up, after prolonged standing, 
during exertion or following a typical precipitant: 

unpleasant sight, sound, smell or pain 

venepuncture 

micturition 

cough 

large meal 

• Brief duration of T-LOC (<1 minute) 

• Rapid return of clear-headedness after T-LOC 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 












TRANSIENT LOSS OF CONSCIOUSNESS: SYNCOPE AND SEIZURES 


Seizure: overview 


Full clinical assessment, U+E, Mg , Ca , LFTs, FBC 


CBG <3.0 mmol/L? 


No 


>10 min continuous seizure / recurrent 
seizures without full recovery in between? 


Yes 

Likely hypoglycaemic 


seizure 

Yes 






Urgent laboratory 
- glucose and 
correction 


Yes 


3 


4 


5 


6 


High suspicion of underlying 
intracranial pathology? 


Yes 


No 


Urgent 

neuroimaging - 
±LP 


-► 


CNS pathology 



1 CBG <3.0 mmol/L? 

Consider hypoglycaemia at the outset because it: 

• is easily identified and corrected 

• will cause permanent neurological damage 
if not corrected 

• needs to be excluded prior to assessment 
for other causes. 

If CBG <3.0 mmol/L, assess and treat as 
described above. 


requires >30 minutes of continuous seizure activ¬ 
ity or repeated seizures without full recovery in 
between, but a lower time threshold facilitates 
early recognition and action. 

Provide appropriate anticonvulsant therapy, 
e.g. IV diazepam, and supportive measures 
concurrently with clinical assessment. Rapidly 
exclude or correct reversible factors (see below) 
and seek urgent input from ICU ± the Neurology 
team. 


>10 min continuous seizure/recurrent 
seizures without full recovery in between? 


3 


High suspicion of underlying 
intracranial pathology? 


Status epilepticus is a medical emergency 
requiring urgent intervention. Formal diagnosis 


Seizure may be a manifestation of important 
underlying intracranial pathology, such as 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 












































TRANSIENT LOSS OF CONSCIOUSNESS: SYNCOPE AND SEIZURES 


277 


Box 31.6 Indications for urgent 
neuroimaging in seizure 


• Status epilepticus 

• Focal or partial onset seizure 

• Contusion, iGCS or focal neurological signs >30 
minutes post-fit 

• Recent head injury 

• Acute severe headache preceding seizure 

• Known malignancy with potential for brain 
metastases 

• Immunosuppression (especially HIV) 

• Meningism, fever or persistent headache and 
suspicion of CNS infection 

• Anticoagulated or bleeding disorder 


haemorrhage, infarction, infection or space- 
occupying lesion. 

Arrange urgent neuroimaging, usually CT, if 
the patient is at risk of these pathologies (Box 
31 .6). Consider neuroimaging to exclude new 
intracranial pathology in any patient with known 
epilepsy with a change in seizure type/pattern 
without an apparent precipitating factor. 

Provided there are no contraindications, 
perform a lumbar puncture (p. 170), following 
CT, if any features suggest CNS infection, e.g. 
fever, meningism, rash. 


4 


Established diagnosis of epilepsy? 


In patients with known epilepsy, address all 
factors that may have lowered seizure threshold 
(see Box 31.1 ) or triggered the event. Measure¬ 
ment of anticonvulsant drug levels is not routinely 
indicated but consider it if there has been a 
recent change in medication or you suspect 
non-compliance. 


Seizure: step-by-step assessment 


5 


Clear precipitating factor? 


important causes of seizure in adults without 
epilepsy include: alcohol (excess or withdrawal), 
recreational drug misuse, e.g. cocaine, ampheta¬ 
mines, drug overdose, e.g. theophylline, tricyclic 
antidepressants, severe metabolic disturbance 
iNa + , iMg 2+ , -lCa 2+ and CNS infection. Look for all 
of these factors and refer for specialist neurological 
evaluation (see below) if none is evident. 


Probable new diagnosis of epilepsy. Refer 
to a neurologist as inpatient or outpatient 

Admit any patient with repeated seizures or 
a significant causative factor that requires 
inpatient treatment. Consider early discharge 
only if patients have fully recovered, exhibit no 
neurological abnormalities and have a respon¬ 
sible adult to accompany and stay with them. 
Seek advice from a neurologist if you have any 
concerns. 

Arrange neuroimaging for all first-fit episodes 
in patients >20 years or with focal features. 
Depending on local resources, imaging may 
be performed as an outpatient - provided 
there are no indications for urgent imaging 
(see Box 31 .6) and a ‘first-fit’ follow-up service 
is available. Further investigation may not be 
required in patients with a pre-existing diagnosis 
of epilepsy who have fully recovered following 
a typical, uncomplicated fit. 

Prior to discharge, inform all patients of 
statutory driving regulations (in the UK see 
www.dft.gov.uk/dvla/medical/ataglance.aspx) 
and advise them to avoid activities where T-LOC 
may be dangerous, e.g. swimming, operating 
machinery, cycling, etc. 


31 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















TRANSIENT LOSS OF CONSCIOUSNESS: SYNCOPE AND SEIZURES 


Syncope: overview 


1 

2 


3 


4 


5 


6 


7 



downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



















































TRANSIENT LOSS OF CONSCIOUSNESS: SYNCOPE AND SEIZURES 


Syncope: step-by-step assessment 


Risk-stratify to determine need tor 
inpatient investigation 

Admit all syncopal patients with red flag cardiac 
features (see Box 31 .3) and discuss promptly 
with the Cardiology team. Clinical decision rules 
and risk prediction tools, e.g. the San Francisco 
Syncope Rule may be useful, but lack sensitivity 
and specificity. Consider discharge with outpa¬ 
tient investigation (preferably in a syncope clinic 
if available) if the patient has recovered fully and 
has no other medical problems or no red flag 
features; otherwise, admit for a period of observa¬ 
tion and investigation (monitoring +/- ambulatory 
monitoring and ECG). Syncope observation units, 
if available, facilitate rapid investigation while the 
patient is under observation for 6 to 24 hours. 


Diagnostic ECG recording? 


Mobitz type II 2nd degree atrioventricular (AV) 
block (Fig. 31 .1), complete heart block (Fig. 31 ,2), 
prolonged pauses, ventricular tachycardia or very 
rapid supraventricular tachycardia (>180/min) on 
the presenting ECG or telemetry establish an 
arrhythmic cause of syncope. Arrhythmia-related 
syncope is also highly likely with persistent sinus 
bradycardia <40 bpm, alternating left and right 
bundle branch block (LBBB and RBBB) or 
pacemaker malfunction with pauses. 

ECG evidence of acute ischaemia suggests 
an arrhythmia secondary to ischaemia, e.g. ven¬ 
tricular tachycardia, or cardiac ischaemia-related 


syncope. Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is 
unlikely in the absence of chest pain or ECG 
evidence of ACS. 

Discuss urgently with a cardiologist if any of 
the above features is present. 


Clinical suspicion of PE, aortic dissection 
J or occult bleeding? 

These conditions may present with syncope, but 
this is rarely the predominant symptom. Exclude 
PE and aortic dissection if syncope occurs in 
the context of sudden-onset chest pain with 
no obvious alternative explanation. Also con¬ 
sider PE in syncopal patients with dyspnoea, 
hypoxia, evidence of DVT or major thrombo¬ 
embolic risk factors. Suspect aortic dissection 
if there is a new early diastolic murmur pulse 
deficit or widened mediastinum on CXR 
(see Ch. 6). Consider subarachnoid haemorrhage 
if there is associated headache (see Ch. 18) 
and ruptured ectopic pregnancy or abdominal 
aortic aneurysm if there is abdominal pain (see 
Ch. 4). 


Clinical or ECG features that suggest 
structural heart disease? 

ECG may identify ‘structural’ causes of cardiac 
syncope e.g. severe aortic stenosis, hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy, prolapsing atrial myxoma or 
conditions that predispose to arrhythmia, e g. 
severe left ventricular (LV) systolic impairment. 



Fig. 31.1 Mobitz type II atrioventricular block. (From Boon NA, Colledge NR, Walker BR. Davidson’s Principles & 
Practice of Medicine, 20th edn Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2006.) 



























































































* 













1 









1 










* 




1 





jtr 





r 

\j 

- 





i 

/ 

V 







r 

A 






l 

r 

A 

f 





1 

r 

\ 

t 






r 



1 








7 
















7 

r 







1 

r 








f 











7 

















r 







1 

1 








J 














































Fig. 31.2 Complete heart block. Arrows indicate P waves. (From Douglas G, Nicol F, Robertson C. Macleod’s Clinical 
Examination, 12th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2009.) 


31 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 








































































280 


TRANSIENT LOSS OF CONSCIOUSNESS: SYNCOPE AND SEIZURES 


Syncope: step-by-step assessment 


Request an ECG if there is exertional syncope, 
a family history of sudden unexplained death 
(especially <40 years), a new murmur, clinical 
features of cardiac failure, or (unless performed 
recently) a history of myocardial infarction (Ml), 
cardiomyopathy, valvular heart disease or con¬ 
genital heart disease. Discuss with a cardiologist 
if any relevant abnormalities are detected. 


Clinical or ECG features that suggest 
arrhythmia-related syncope? 

Suspect an arrhythmic aetiology for syncope in 
the following circumstances: 

• sudden-onset palpitation rapidly followed 
by syncope 

• syncope during exertion or while supine 

• previous Ml or significant structural heart 
disease, e.g. cardiomyopathy, aortic 
stenosis 

• any of the following ECG abnormalities: 

• LBBB (see Fig. 6.5, p. 55), bi- or 
trifascicular block (Fig. 31 .3) 

• sinus bradycardia <50 bpm 

• Mobitz type I 2nd degree AV block 
(Fig. 31 .4) 

• sinus pause >3 seconds 


• evidence of pre-excitation (see Fig. 26.2, 
p. 233) 

• prolonged QT interval (QTc >440 
milliseconds in men or >460 
milliseconds in women) 

• Brugada pattern: RBBB with ST 
elevation in leads \A-V 3 (Fig 31 .5) 

• features of arrhythmogenic right 
ventricular cardiomyopathy: negative T 
waves in leads W-V 3 and epsilon waves 

• pathological Q wave. 

• any ECG abnormality or history of 

cardiovascular disorder in the absence of a 
typical prodrome or precipitant for reflex or 
orthostatic syncope. 

The correlation of a syncopal episode with 
a documented rhythm disturbance is the gold 
standard for diagnosis of arrhythmia-mediated 
syncope. This is frequently challenging, particu¬ 
larly when syncopal episodes are infrequent. The 
choice of investigation and degree of persistence 
depend on the risk of life-threatening arrhythmia 
and frequency of syncope. 

Admit patients with red flag cardiac features 
(see Box 31.3) immediately for continuous inpa¬ 
tient ECG monitoring. Arrange Holter (1 to 7 day 




Fig. 31.4 Mobitz type I atrioventricular block (From Boon NA, Colledge NR, Walker BR. Davidson’s Principles & 
Practice of Medicine, 20th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2006.) 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 














TRANSIENT LOSS OF CONSCIOUSNESS: SYNCOPE AND SEIZURES 


Syncope: step by-step assessment 



Fig. 31.5 Brugada syndrome. (From Hampton JR. The ECG in Practice, 5th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2008.) 


tape) or ambulatory patch monitoring (14 days) 
if symptoms occur relatively frequently. Consider 
an event recorder (external or implanted) if there 
s a high suspicion of arrhythmia but episodes 
are infrequent or prove difficult to capture by 
other methods. 


Syncope after standing up with 
documented postural hypotension? 


Diagnose orthostatic syncope if there is: 

• a history of light-headedness shortly after 
standing, followed by brief T-LOC 

• a documented postural BP drop (of 
>20 mmHg in systolic BP or >10 mmHg 
in diastolic BP within 3 minutes of moving 
from lying to standing). 

In other circumstances, it may be difficult to 
distinguish orthostatic from reflex syncope, e.g. 
when symptoms occur with prolonged standing. 

Look for an underlying cause of postural hypo¬ 
tension. In severe form it may reflect fluid loss, 
e.g. major haemorrhage or severe dehydration. 
Other causes include Parkinson’s syndromes, 


autonomic neuropathy and drugs, e.g. antihy¬ 
pertensives, vasodilators (especially sublingual 
nitroglycerine) and diuretics, particularly in the 
elderly. 


7 Typical precipitant or prodrome? 

A clear precipitating trigger, e.g. intense emotion, 
venepuncture or prolonged standing (vasovagal 
syncope) or coughing, sneezing or micturition 
(situational syncope), together with typical prodro¬ 
mal symptoms, strongly suggests reflex syncope, 
especially in patients with no ECG or clinical 
evidence to suggest structural heart disease or 
arrhythmia. Consider tilt-table testing in cases of 
diagnostic doubt. Carotid sinus hypersensitiv¬ 
ity is a form of reflex syncope and is usually 
diagnosed with carotid sinus massage (CSM). 
CSM should be avoided in patients with a history 
of cerebrovascular accident/transient ischaemic 
attack or a carotid bruit, and requires continuous 
ECG monitoring; it is diagnostic if syncope is 
reproduced in the presence of asystole lasting 
>3 seconds. 


31 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















Urinary incontinence 


Urinary incontinence (Ul), the involuntary leakage 
of urine, affects 15% of women and 10% of men 
aged >65 years. Treatment or amelioration of Ul 
can greatly enhance quality of life but it tends 
to be under-reported and under-recognized in 
clinical practice. Ul is frequently multifactorial, 
particulary in frail elderly patients, so seek to 
identify all potentially modifiable contributing 
factors. Take care also to evaluate the impact 
of symptoms on daily activities and quality of life. 

Stress incontinence 

Urine leakage is provoked by an increase in 
intra-abdominal pressure, such as during 
coughing, sneezing, effort or exertion. It is 
usually due to insufficient urethral support from 
the pelvic floor muscles but can also be caused 
by intrinsic weakness of the urethral sphincter, 
e.g. post-pelvic surgery. Stress incontinence 
is far more common in females than males 
and most often relates to obstetric trauma. It 
frequently accompanies pelvic organ prolapse 
and may also occur with atrophic vaginitis. Stress 
incontinence in males is usually a complication 
of prostatectomy. 

Urge incontinence 

Urine leakage occurs due to intense bladder 
contraction and is preceded by the sensation 
of urgency. This can result from neurological 


disease, e.g. multiple sclerosis, spina bifida but 
is more often due to intrinsic bladder activity 
(‘detrusor overactivity’). Lower UTI may produce 
acute transient urge incontinence. 

Mixed incontinence 

A combination of stress and urge incontinence; 
treatment should be aimed at the more dominant 
aspect. 

Overflow incontinence 

The involuntary passage of urine from an overfull 
bladder which may or may not be accompanied 
by a sensation of urgency. Incomplete bladder 
emptying may result from: 

• bladder outflow obstruction: benign 
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), prostate 
cancer, bladder tumour, urethral stenosis, 
severe constipation 

• bladder atonia in neurological disease, 
e.g. cauda equina or conus medullaris 
compression, autonomic neuropathy 

• drugs with anticholinergic effects such as 
antipsychotics or antidepressants. 

Treatment of overflow incontinence is with 
relief of obstruction (e.g. resection of prostate 
cancer, medical treatment of BPH) or intermittent 
catheterization. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










URINARY INCONTINENCE 


Differential diagnosis 


283 


Box 32.1 Aggravating factors 


• Polydipsia/polyuria including: poorly controlled 
diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus, 
hypercalcaemia, psychogenic polydipsia 

• Caffeine 

• Alcohol overuse/misuse 

• Mobility problems (see Ch. 24) 

• Visual impairment 

• Obesity 

• Respiratory disease 

• Smoking 

• Cognitive impairment, e.g. delirium or dementia 
(see Ch. 8) 


Continuous incontinence 

Constant leakage of urine throughout the day 
(and night) suggests the presence of a fistula 
between the bladder and the urethra or vagina. 
Underlying causes include urogynaecological 
cancer, previous pelvic surgery/radiotherapy 
or obstetric trauma. 


Box 32.2 Medications potentially 
aggravating incontinence 


• Diuretics 

• Drugs with cholinergic effects 1 

• Drugs with anticholinergic effects 2 

• Alpha-agonists 

• Calcium channel blockers 

• Beta-agonists 

• Sedatives 

• Lithium 


'May cause or aggravate urge incontinence. 

2 May cause or aggravate overflow incontinence. 


Functional/multifactorial incontinence 

This occurs when the person is aware of the 
need to urinate, but for one or more physical 
or cognitive reasons are unable to get to the 
toilet in time. Potential contributing factors are 
shown in Box 32.1 and aggravating medications 
in Box 32.2. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


















1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 


URINARY INCONTINENCE 


Overview 


Full clinical assessment, urinalysis +/- post-void residual / perineal examination 


Suspect spinal pathology? 

Yes 


No 



No 


t Post-void residual urine volume? 


No 


Acute illness? 


No 


Continuous urine leak? 


Urgent MRI spine _ 

+/- neurosurgical review 


Cauda equina / 
conus medulla is 
syndrome 


Symptoms of UTI + positive 

Yes 

urinalysis? 



-► Likely UTI 


Yes 

. 




Yes 





Confirm with 
MC+S and 
reassess Ul after 
treatment 


Evaluate for 
underlying cause 


Reassess after 
treatment of 
underlying illness 


Yes 





No 


Evidence of atrophic vaginitis / 

Yes 

Atrophic vaginitis 

urethritis? 


/ urethritis 


No 


Prominent urge symptoms? 


No 


Yes 

Detrusor overactivity / 


neurogenic Ul 


Ul on coughing / sneezing / effort? 


Yes 



Stiess incontinence 


No 


Likely functional / multifactorial Ul 

Refer Urology if suspicion of urinary tract disease, e.g. younger patients / associated GU symptoms / 
previous pelvic surgery or radiotherapy 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 






























































URINARY INCONTINENCE 


285 


1 Suspect spinal pathology? 

Arrange urgent spinal MR I to exclude cauda 
equina/conus medullaris syndrome in any patient 
with recent onset of Ul associated with lower limb 
weakness, altered perianal/perineal sensation 
(does toilet paper feel normal when wiping?), 
faecal incontinence or new low back or leg pain. 
Seek immediate neurosurgical/neurology input 
if concerning imaging features or unexplained 
neurological findings. 


2 


Symptoms of UTI and positive urinalysis? 


Suspect UTI if there is a short history of Ul 
accompanied by fever, dysuria, frequency or 
malodourous urine; the absence of leucocytes 
and nitrites on dipstick makes UTI very unlikely. 
If dipstick testing is positive or there is strong 
clinical suspicion, send an MSU for culture; treat 
confirmed infection then re-evaluate to ensure 
that Ul resolves. Evaluate for prostatic disease 
(see Step 3) in men with >1 UTI and arrange 
renal tract imaging (USS initially) in women with 
>2 UTI; in both cases consider referral to Urology 
for further specialist investigation. 


3 


tPost-void residual (PVR) urine volume? 


Measure PVR in all patients with unexplained 
Ul using a bladder USS scan (correlates well 
with urinary catheter volumes). Suspect overflow 
incont nence due to incomplete bladder emptying 
if the PVR is >100 ml_ (or >50 mL in younger 
patients). In men, ask about other symptoms 
of bladder outlet obstruction, e.g. hesitancy, 
poor stream, check a PSA (prior to rectal exam) 
and evaluate the prostate by rectal examina¬ 
tion. Exclude constipation/faecal impaction as 


Step-by-step assessment 


an underlying cause, particularly in frail elderly 
patients, with rectal exam +/- abdominal X-ray 
Seek a neurological opinion if there is a history of 
neurological disorder or associated symptoms/ 
signs of neurological disease, e.g. lower limb 
weakness. Otherwise, consider CT abdomen/ 
pelvis and refer to Urology for further assessment 
and investigation, e.g. cystoscopy. 


4 


Acute illness? 


Suspect transient Ul as a non-specific manifesta¬ 
tion of illness in elderly patients with frailty or multi¬ 
morbidity who are acutely unwell, have experienced 
an abrupt decline in function, mobility or cognition 
or who have evidence of newly-deranged physiol¬ 
ogy. Seek and treat the underlying illness then 
re-evaluate continence once the patient has 
returned to baseline status. 


5 


Continuous urine leak? 


Suspect a fistula between the bladder (or ureter) 
and the vagina/urethra if Ul is continuous rather 
than intermittent - especially if there is a history of 
previous pelvic surgery/radiotherapy or a complex 
obstetric history. Request an IV urogram and 
refer to Urology for specialist assessment. 


6 


Evidence of atrophic vaginitis/urethritis? 


Suspect this as a cause of Ul (usually stress-type) 
in postmenopausal women with symptoms of 
urethral irritation (e.g. burning, frequency, painful 
intercourse) but negative urine dipstck and 
culture or with mucosal pallor or erythema on 
perineal examination. Reassess symptoms after 
treatment with topical oestrogen for at least 14 
days. Continue to seek other causes of Ul unless 
symptoms fully resolve. 


32 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 

















URINARY INCONTINENCE 


Step-by-step assessment 


Box 32.3 IQ questionnaire 


1. During the past 3 months, have you leaked urine 
(even a small amount)? 

Yes - move to question 2 
No - stop questionnaire. 

2. During the past 3 months did you leak urine: 

when performing physical activity (coughing, 

sneezing, lifting, exercising)? 

when felt urge to empty your bladder, but not 

able to get to the toilet in time? 

neither of the above circumstances. 

3. During the past 3 months did you leak urine 
MOST often: 

when performing physical activity (coughing, 

sneezing, lifting, exercising)? Stress 

incontinence predominant 

when felt urge to empty your bladder, but 

not able to get to the toilet in time? Urge 

incontinence predominant 

neither of the above circumstances. Other 

cause (neither urge incontinence or stress 

incontinence) 

both of the above circumstances equally as 
often. Mixed urinary incontinence. 


7 


Prominent urge symptoms? 


Evaluate as urge incontinence if the patient 
reports a clear and consistent history of urgency 
to void prior to leakage of urine. Consider using 
the 3 IQ questionnaire (Box 32.3) or a voiding 
diary if the history is unclear or the pattern of 
Ul is variable. 

Ensure you have excluded urinary retention: 
repeat post-void bladder scan if initial results 
equivocal and perform post-void catheterization 
if there is a strong clinical suspicion. Consider a 
neurogenic aetiology and obtain specialist input 
in patients with a history of neurological disorder 
(e.g. multiple sclerosis, spina bifida) or associated 
neurological signs or symptoms. 

In the absence of urinary retention or neurologi¬ 
cal features, assume detrusor overactivity as the 
likely diagnosis. Refer for specialist urological 
assessment, e.g. urodynamic studies if the 
diagnosis is uncertain or symptoms fail to 
respond to standard treatments. 


8 


Ul on coughing/sneezing/effort? 


Evaluate as stress incontinence if urine leakage 
consistently coincides with manoeuvres that 
increase intra-abdominal pressure, e.g coughing, 
sneezing, laughing, sitting/standing-up - espe¬ 
cially if there is no associated sensation of 
urgency. Where the history is unclear, inspect for 
leakage of urine while asking the patient to cough 
or, again, consider using the 3 IQ questionnaire 
(see Box 32.3) or a voiding diary. 

Refer to Gynaecology if there is uterine/ 
vaginal prolapse. Consider potentially aggravating 
factors such chronic lung disease (cough) or 
medications (see Box 32.2). In women with 
uncomplicated stress Ul, reassess after simple 
measures such as pelvic muscle retraining but 
consider surgical evaluation if symptoms remain 
severe. Refer male patients with stress Ul for 
Urology assessment. 


9 


Likely functional/multifactorial Ul. 
Specialist urological assessment in 
selected cases 


In frail or elderly patients Ul is very often due 
to a constellation of factors that prevent timely 
toileting (funct onal incontinence) rather than a 
single specific urinary tract pathology. Consider 
specialist urological assessment/investigation 
if there are associated genitourinary (GU) 
symptoms such as haematuria or pelvic pain a 
complex obstetric history, previous pelvic surgery 
or radiotherapy, or where functional incontinence 
seems unlikely, e.g. younger patients or those 
without significant comorbidity. 

Otherwise, systematically address all factors 
that may be contributing to Ul (see Box 32.1). 
Review medications (see Box 32.2) and amend 
where necessary. Establish whether the patient 
has awareness of the need to void. If not, try 
prompted toileting (particularly after diuretics). If 
the patient has awareness of the need to void 
but can’t reach the toilet in time, assess mobility 
(see Ch. 24) and consider the need for walking 
aids, a downstairs toilet or commode. Evaluate 
the effectiveness of continence aids such as 
pads, urisheath or commode. Finally, determine 
the level of distress caused by symptoms and 
the overall impact on quality of life Consider 
referral for comprehensive geriatric assessment. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















This page intentionally left blank 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



Vaginal bleeding 



Vaginal bleeding is a distressing symptom with a 
wide variety of potential causes. These may be 
categorized broadly according to the reproduc¬ 
tive age of the patient, their pregnancy status, 
the duration of symptoms and any associated 
features. Examine the patient carefully to identify 
rectal, urethral, vaginal and cervical sources of 
blood; if necessary, place a urinary catheter 
to differentiate between vaginal bleeding and 
haematuria. Be sensitive and empathetic, but 
ensure that the assessment is thorough. Arrange 
urgent gynaecological/obstetric review in any 
patient with major PV bleeding. 

Pregnancy-related bleeding 

First trimester 

Vaginal bleeding in the first trimester is very 
common. Bleeding may be due to miscarriage 
or ectopic pregnancy, or may have a benign 
explanation in the presence of an ongoing 
intrauterine pregnancy. Miscarriages may be 
threatened (the foetus is still viable), partial 
(non viable products of conception remain in 
the uterus) or complete (products of conception 
have been passed). In miscarriage, patients may 
describe a loss of pregnancy-related symptoms. 
Miscarriages and ectopic pregnancies are often 
associated with abdominal pain. Miscarriages 
typically present with central, crampy, menstrual- 
like lower abdominal pain In ectopic pregnancy, 
the pain is unilateral and constant since there 
may be bleeding into the peritoneal cavity causing 
peritoneal irritation. Unilateral lower abdominal 
pain in females of reproductive age (regardless 
of PV bleeding) should be assumed to be an 
ectopic pregnancy until ruled out. 

Second and third trimester 

Bleeding during the second and third trimesters 
is abnormal and must be investigated Serious 
and potentially life-threatening causes include 


placenta praevia (a low-lying placenta with sub¬ 
sequent bleeding from the placental edge) and 
placental abruption (bleeding due to placental 
separation tom the uterus; 1% pregnancies). 
Placenta praevia is diagnosed on USS and 
causes painless bleeding. Placental abruption 
is essentially a clinical diagnosis based on 
abdominal pain and vaginal bleeding, since the 
absence of a retro-placental haematoma on USS 
does not exclude the diagnosis. Be aware that 
placental abruption may be ‘concealed’ - with 
no/minimal visible PV bleeding. In this situation, 
blood loss may still be significant but remains 
contained within the uterine cavity. The patient 
will have haemodynamic instability out of keeping 
with the apparently absent/small volume PV 
bleeding together with a ‘woody hard’ uterus 
due to blood accumulation. The treatment for 
placental abruption is delivery of the baby and 
placenta 

Heavy menstrual bleeding 

Heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB; previously 
known as menorrhagia) may be defined objec¬ 
tively or subjectively. The objective definition 
is blood loss greater than 80 ml_ in a cycle, 
but in practice diagnosis is based on women 
subjectively reporting using more tampons/pads 
than usual, using pads and tampons together or 
soaking through protection onto clothing. 

Pathological causes of HMB may be structural 
or non-structural. Structural causes include 
fibroids (leiomyomas) (20-30%), endometrial 
and cervical polyps (5-10%), adenomyosis (5%) 
and malignancy or hyperplasia. Non-structural 
causes include coagulopathy (e.g. von Willebrand 
disease, anticoagulants), ovulatory dysfunction 
endometrial disorders (e.g. endometritis), iatro¬ 
genic causes (e.g. contraceptives, tamoxifen). 
After investigation, approximately 40 60% of 
patients with HMB have no identifiable uterine, 
endocrine, haematological or infective pathology. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 








VAGINAL BLEEDING 


Intermenstrual bleeding 

Intermenstrual bleeding is usually low volume. 
The pattern of bleeding may be related to 
contact such as postcoitus, or intermenstrual 
bleeding with no clear precipitants. Causes of 
contact bleeding are typically cervical, such 
as cervical ectropion, cervical cancer, cervical 
polyps or infections (typically chlamydia but 
also gonorrhoea). Non-contact, intermenstrual 
bleeding has a wide range of causes. There 
is a continuum between intermenstrual and 
irregular menstrual bleeding that can be difficult 
to differentiate. However, in many instances, the 
treatment is similar. Causes include endometrial 
lesions (cancer polyps), fibroids (although more 
commonly cause HMB), contraceptives, sexually 
transmitted infections and, rarely, medical causes 
such as coagulopathies and hypothyroidism. 
Oral contraception and intrauterine device 


Differential diagnosis 

contraception may cause abnormal menstrual 
bleeding. 

Uncommonly, low-volume mid-cycle bleeding 
may be due to ovulation (when the Graafian 
follicle ruptures and hormonal balance becomes 
predominantly progesterone-based, resulting in 
a shed of blood from the endometrium). This is 
associated with acute, unilateral, lower abdominal 
pain (mittelschmerz, ‘middle pain’) lasting hours 
to days, which is often the presenting problem. 

Postmenopausal bleeding 

Postmenopausal bleeding (PMB) is defined 
as vaginal bleeding >12 months after the last 
menstrual cycle. Up to 10% of women with PMB 
have endometrial cancer. Other malignant causes 
include cervical, vaginal, vulval and, rarely, ovarian 
cancer. Atrophic vaginitis with contact bleeding 
due to postmenopausal dryness, pessary devices 
or intercourse is a diagnosis of exclusion. 


33 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 








VAGINAL BLEEDING 


290 “ 

Overview 



downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 









































VAGINAL BLEEDING 


291 


Step-by-step assessment 


Clinical tool 

Examination of the female genitalia 


Vaginal examination is not routine but is often indicated 
if inflammatory or neoplastic disease of the genitourinary 
organs is suspected (Fig. 33.1). Its intimate nature raises 
medicolegal considerations necessitating both informed 
consent and the presence of a chaperone throughout the 
examination. 


The vaginal examination of females with an intact hymen 
should be avoided, particularly as the information requ red 
can often be obtained by digital examination of the ectum. 
Vaginal examination of minors requires the consent of a 
parent or guardian. 



Fig 33.1 Vaginal examination. (From Ford MJ, 
Flennessey I, Japp A. Introduction to Clinical Examination, 
8th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2005.) 


1 Evidence of shock? 

Use Boxes 15.1 and 15.2 (p. 153 [Gl haemor¬ 
rhage]) as a framework for assessing resuscitation 
requirements in acute severe vaginal bleeding. 
Remember that young patients, especially 
pregnant women, may maintain relatively normal 
physiological parameters until shock is profound. 
Assume major blood loss if there are features 
of intraperitoneal bleeding, e.g. peritonism 
shoulder-tip pain or cervical excitation. Arrange 
immediate gynaecological/obstetric review in any 
patient with major vaginal bleeding 


2 Pregnant? 

Test for pregnancy by urine dipstick and/or 
serum p-HCG, which is quantitative and more 
sensitive in very early pregnancy, in all women of 
reproductive age with vaginal bleeding. Perform 
urgent USS in all first trimester patients (including 
newly diagnosed) as part of the initial assess¬ 
ment to determine foetal viabil ty and location 
(intrauterine or ectopic) as well as the location 
of the placenta. For women in the second and 
third trimester, exclude placenta praevia by USS 
prior to bimanual examination or speculum to 
avoid disruption of the placenta-cervical junction 
and catastrophic bleeding. When performing 
bimanual and speculum examination, assess 
the volume of passed blood, check for adnexal 
tenderness (ectopic pregnancy) and identify 
products of conception at the cervix that require 
removal. 


3 


Postmenopausal? 


Look for associated features of gynaeco¬ 
logical cancer such as pelvic pain, pelvic mass, 
obstructive Gl or urinary tract symptoms or 
weight loss, but exclude malignancy in all patients 
with PMB. 

Identify sources of lower reproductive tract 
(endocervix vagina, vulva) bleeding through 
careful examination and biopsy any visible 
lesions. Arrange transvaginal USS to image the 
ovaries and endometrium and proceed to endo¬ 
metrial biopsy if the endometrium is thickened 
(e.g. >3 mm). Even if the USS appears no mal, 
consider hysteroscopy and biopsy to exclude 
endometrial cancer if bleeding persists Arrange 
cervical smear cytology to rule out cervical 
cancer, especially if endometrial pathology is 


33 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



















VAGINAL BLEEDING 


Step-by-step assessment 


excluded. Biopsy all visible cervical lesions even 
if the cytological smear is apparently normal. 
Do not rely on gynaecological tumour markers 
such as CA125 to rule in or rule out underlying 
malignancy in patients with PMB. 

Consider other common causes of PMB such 
as atrophic vaginitis and polyps only once 
malignancy is excluded. Take vaginal/cervical 
swabs if the history raises suspicion of sexually 
transmitted infection. 


4 


Bleeding confined to menstruation? 


Most patients are unable to quantify menstrual 
blood loss accurately so ask about the func¬ 
tional effect of menstruation to identify HMB: is 
the patient using more sanitary products 
(tampons, pads, etc.) than normal, do they 
require double protection (tampons and pads 
together), are they experiencing flooding (soiling 
of clothes through the sanitary products) or clots? 
Check FBC to exclude iron deficiency anaemia. 
Enquire carefully about associated postcoital or 
intermenstrual bleeding - if present assess as 
per step 5. 

Ask specifically about contraceptive use - lUDs 
are associated with HMB; conversely recent 
discontinuation of an oral contraceptive may 
lead to increased menstrual blood loss. 

Check thyroid function tests if there are 
clinical features of hypothyroidism (p. 133, Ch. 
1 3) and prolactin levels if there is a history of 
galactorrhoea. 

Screen for coagulopathy if the patient has had 
HMB since the onset of periods; has a family 
history of bleeding disorder; or reports spontane¬ 
ous bruising, troublesome epistaxis or unexplained 
Gl bleeding. Enquire about anticoagulant use but 
only attribute HMB to anticoagulation once other 
causes have been excluded 

Take high vaginal and endocervical swabs 
if there is any suspicion of infection. Consider 
gynaecological referral for further investigation 
including USS (pelvic +/- transvaginal) and/or 
hysteroscopy, especially if there is persistent/ 
troublesome bleeding, associated pelvic pain or 
a palpable pelvic mass on abdominal/bimanual 
examination. 


Remember that 40-60% of patients with 
HMB have no identifiable uterine, endocrine 
haematological or infective pathology. 

Establish the degree of distress caused by 
bleeding and the impact on quality of life as this 
may influence treatment options. Non-hormonal 
treatment comprises tranexamic acid (antifibrino¬ 
lytic) or NSAIDs such as mefenamic acid (inhibit 
prostaglandin response) during menstruation. 
Hormonal treatment is progesterone (oral/IUD) or 
combined contraception. Surgical options include 
endometrial ablation, myomectomy (removal of 
fibroids), or, if all other avenues are unsuccessful 
and the patient wishes for no more children, 
hysterectomy. 


5 


Contact/postcoital bleed? 


Examine carefully for vaginal and cervical pathol¬ 
ogy (see clinical toolkit - vaginal examination) 
and take high vaginal/endocervical swabs in any 
patient who reports postcoital or other contact 
bleeding. Arrange cervical smear cytology unless 
recently performed and biopsy any visible cervical 
lesion even if the cytological smear is apparently 
normal. 


6 


Consider other causes of 
intermenstrual bleeding 


Establish the pattern and nature of symptoms 
- this may range from low-volume 'spotting' 
between defined periods to apparently totally 
irregular and excessively frequent periods of 
variable duration. Intermenstrual bleeding unrelated 
to intercourse/contact is more likely to have an 
endometrial or systemic cause. Enquire about 
contraception use and, in particular, any recent 
changes: the combined oral contraceptive pill 
typically causes breakthrough bleeding (small 
volume spotting between the monthly bleed when 
omitting the tablets for 7 days). Progesterone- 
based contraceptives (depot preparations such as 
Nexplanon, hormonal coil such as Mirena) typically 
result in an irregular pattern of bleeding. Consider 
screening for coagulopathy if there are sugges¬ 
tive features (see step 4). Refer any patient with 
persistent unexplained intermenstrual bleeding 
for gynaecology review and further investigation. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










This page intentionally left blank 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 




^ Weight loss 


Unintentional weight loss of >5% body weight 
in <12 months requires investigation. Lesser 
degrees of weight loss may also signify underlying 
pathology, particularly in the frail elderly. Establish 
how much weight has been lost, and over what 
time frame; whether there has been a change 
in clothes size; and whether there has been a 
corresponding change in appetite. If present, 
use ‘system-specific’ symptoms or signs (e.g 
haemoptysis, altered bowel habit) to narrow 
the differential diagnosis and guide appropriate 
investigation. 

Malignancy 

In observational studies, 16-36% of adult 
patients with unintentional weight loss have 
underlying malignancy. Of these, approximately 
50% originate within the Gl tract. Weight loss 
in non-GI cancers tends to be associated with 
more advanced disease. 

Non-malignant Gl disease 

Weight loss is frequently observed in disorders 
that lead to swallowing difficulty (see Ch. 11), 
malabsorption (e.g. coeliac disease) or persistent 
inflammation (e.g. inflammatory bowel disease), 
in peptic ulcer disease, mesenteric ischaemia 
and chronic pancreatitis, the pain associated 
with eating may lead to weight loss through 
avoidance of food. However, weight loss is not 
an expected feature of functional Gl disorders 
such as irritable bowel syndrome. 

Endocrine disorders 

Persistent hyperglycaemia due to uncontrolled 
or undiagnosed diabetes causes weight loss, 
alongside polydipsia and polyuria. In thyro¬ 
toxicosis weight loss occurs despite normal or 
increased appetite. Patients with hypercalcaemia 
may experience weight loss due to underlying 
malignant disease or the direct effects of TCa 2+ , 
e.g. osmotic diuresis, anorexia, nausea and 


vomiting. Weight loss is also one of several 
non-specific presenting symptoms in chronic 
adrenal insufficiency (Box 25.2, p. 223). 

Chronic disease 

In severe non-malignant disease such as 
advanced COPD, heart failure or chronic kidney 
disease, several mechanisms may contribute to 
weight loss including poor appetite, persistent 
catabolic state and polypharmacy. Prominent 
weight loss is also a feature of chronic infection, 
e.g. tuberculosis, infective endocarditis and HIV. 

Neurological disorder 

Motor neuron disease, Parkinson’s disease, 
multiple sclerosis and stroke may lead to weight 
loss through dysphagia (see Ch. 11). Limb weak¬ 
ness and impaired functional abilities can present 
a significant barrier to food preparation and 
consumption. Multifactorial weight loss is also 
common in dementia, particularly in advanced 
stages. 

Medication 

Drug side effects such as anorexia, dry mouth, 
altered taste sensation, nausea, vomiting or 
sedation may result in reduced calorie intake 
(Box 34.1). Certain drugs are misused to facilitate 
weight loss, e.g. laxatives or thyroxine. 

Psychiatric 

Low mood can lead to low appetite, or lack of 
motivation to prepare meals, resulting in weight 
loss. This is a more common phenomenon in 
elderly people with mood disorders. The preva¬ 
lence of depression in older adults (>65 years 
old) is estimated at around 35%, and higher still 
in those living in institutional settings. Addressing 
the underlying depressive illness can lead to 
improved oral intake and weight gain. Primary 
eating disorders (anorexia and bulimia) are most 
commonly identified in younger women, but are 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 
















Differential diagnosis 


295 


Box 34.1 Drug causes of weight loss 


Direct weight loss effect 

Diuretics (‘pseudo’ weight loss) 

Levothyroxine (if excessive dosage) 

Topiramate (mechanism uncertain) 

Appetite suppressants, e.g. Lorcaserin 
Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) analogues, e.g. 
Liraglutide 

Sympathomimetic agents, e.g. methylphenidate, 
dextroamphetamine 

Sodium-glucose Cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, e.g. 
Empagliflozin 

Other drug-induced mechanisms of weight loss 

Nausea and vomit ng: see Box 25.1 , p. 223 
Altered sense of taste, e.g. Allopurinol, Zopiclone, 
Metronidazole 

Dry mouth, e.g. anticholinergics, clonidine, diuretics 
Sedaton, e.g. opiates, benzodiazepines, antipsychotics 


Other 

Explore possible social causes for weight loss 
such as lack of money to buy food social 
isolation and/or chronic alcohol excess Poor 
dentition or ill-fitting dentures may also contribute 
to undernutrition. 

Unintentional weight loss is a concerning but 
non-specific symptom. Refer, initially, to the 
relevant chapter if one of the following symptoms 
is present: Breast lump (Ch. 5), Dysphagia (Ch. 
11), Gl haemorrhage (Ch. 15), Haematuria (Ch. 
16), Haemoptysis (Ch. 17), Jaundice (Ch. 19), 
Scrotal swelling (Ch. 29), Vaginal bleeding (Ch. 
33). Return to this pathway if no cause for weight 
loss is identified. 


increasingly recognized in young men; the patient 
may deny that a problem exists and concerns 
are often raised by relatives and friends who 
have noticed a change in eating behaviour or 
physical appearance. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 











WEIGHT LOSS 


296 “ ' 

Overview 


Full clinical assessment, breast, genital & rectal examination, FBC, U&E, LFT, calcium, glucose, 
TFT +/- CXR 


1 Clear cause identified on initial assessment: 



10 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


































































WEIGHT LOSS 


297 


Step-by-step assessment 


Clear cause identified on initial 
screening? 

Hyperglycaemia 

Consider new-onset diabetes in patients without 
a pre-existing diagnosis (see Clinical tool p. 299): 
check for ketoacidosis and, if present, admit for 
urgent treatment. In the absence of ketoacidosis, 
refer to your local diabetes service for treatment 
initiation. Remember that a mild, transient increase 
in blood glucose level may occur in any severe 
acute illness (stress hyperglycaemia). In older 
patients with new-onset diabetes and weight 
loss consider underlying pancreatic malignancy, 
especially if there is associated abdominal pain. 

In patients with known diabetes, use 
plasma HbAlc to gauge the severity of recent 
hyperglycaemia; consider hyperglycaemia as a 
contributor to weight loss if control is suboptimal 
(especially in type 1 diabetes) but continue to 
search for alternative causes. 

Thyrotoxicosis (TSH) 

Suppressed TSH with Tt 4 /T 3 level is diagnostic 
of hyperthyroidism. Look for associated clinical 
features including tremor, poor sleep, heat 
intolerance and increased bowel activity +/- eye 
and skin changes in Graves’ disease. Check 
thyroid receptor antibody (TRAB) levels to help 
identify the underlying aetiology and refer to 
Endocrinology. 

Hypercalcaemia 

Check plasma parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels to 
identify the likely cause. PTH should be suppressed 
by hypercalcaemia so T or ‘inappropriately normal’ 
PTH suggests primary hyperparathyroidism. If 
TPTH, consider malignancy (e.g. skeletal metas- 
tases, multiple myeloma or tumour secretion of 
PTH-related peptide). Other causes, particularly if 
hypercalcaemia is mild, include sarcoidosis, thiazide 
diuretics and vitamin D analogues. 


‘System-specific’ findings? 


Consider underlying malignancy in any patient 
with unexplained weight loss. Look for clues 
in the history, physical examination and 
routine tests that may help to target further 
investigation. 


Request an urgent CXR in patients with 
persistent respiratory symptoms (>3 weeks) or 
in those >40 years with a history of smoking or 
asbestos exposure. Refer for respiratory inves¬ 
tigation (usually CT chest +/- bronchoscopy) in 
patients with an abnormal CXR (>95% of patients 
with symptomatic lung cancer) or respiratory 
symptoms for >6 weeks despite a normal CXR. 

Refer patients with concerning Gl symptoms 
or unexplained iron deficiency anaemia for urgent 
endoscopic evaluation: upper Gl endoscopy if 
dysphagia, vomiting or upper abdominal pain/ 
discomfort; colonoscopy if altered bowel habit, 
tenesmus or lower abdominal pain/discomfort; 
upper and lower Gl endoscopy if iron-deficiency 
anaemia. CT colonogram provides a less-invasive 
alternative to colonoscopy and may be more 
appropriate in selected patients, e.g. frail or 
multimorbid. 

Arrange appropriate imaging if you palpate an 
abdominal or pelvic mass. USS is often a helpful 
initial investigation, particularly for pelvic masses, 
but CT is frequently required for further char¬ 
acterisation +/- staging of malignant tumours. 

Check a PSA level in males with prostatic 
symptoms. Measure PSA prior to the rectal exam 
to avoid false positive tests. Refer patients with 
a hard irregular prostate or TPSA (>3 ng/mL if 
<60 years; >4 ng/mL if 60-69 years; >5 ng/mL 
if >70 years) for urgent urological assessment. 
Bear in mind that localized prostate cancer is 
unlikely to account for significant weight loss so 
continue to seek alternative causes unless there 
are features of advanced disease, e.g. bone pain, 
biochemical evidence of skeletal metastases (e.g. 
tALP) or a markedly TPSA, e.g. >20 ng/mL. 

Lymphadenopathy, either local or generalized, 
may signify infection, inflammation, e.g. connec¬ 
tive tissue disease, haematological malignancy or 
solid organ cancer with lymphatic involvement. 
Check LDH (often t in haematological malig¬ 
nancy) and screen for infection and autoimmune 
disease. In persistent lymphadenopathy consider 
CT chest/abdomen/pelvis and arrange lymph 
node biopsy to establish a tissue diagnosis. 


3 


Suspect infection? 


Perform a septic screen in patients with fever or 
elevated white cell count/inflammatory markers 
(see Clinical tool, p. 142). Ask about foreign travel, 


34 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 















WEIGHT LOSS 


Step-by-step assessment 


infectious contacts and risk factors for HIV. 
Examine carefully and repeatedly for murmurs 
and peripheral stigmata of endocarditis. 


4 


Potential drug culprit? 


Review all medications, prescribed and non- 
prescribed, including any ‘nutritional supple¬ 
ments’. In patients with reduced dietary intake 
ask about symptoms such as dry mouth, 
drowsiness, altered taste sensation or nausea 
and look for potential drug culprits (Box 34.1). 
If you suspect a drug cause, reassess weight 
and symptoms after trial discontinuation (if 
appropriate). 


5 Alcohol/drug misuse? 

Enquire about alcohol intake (Box 2.1 , p. 1 1) and 
recreational drug use, e.g. cocaine, ampheta¬ 
mines in a non-judgmental manner. Where 
possible seek collateral history from friends or 
family (who may have raised the concerns re: 
weight loss). Explore associated factors that may 
be contributing to weight loss such as appetite 
suppression, replacement of meals with alcohol 
intake, lack of money to buy food or co-existent 
mood disorders. 


6 


Features of low mood? 


Look for evidence of low mood such as anhedo- 
nia (loss of pleasure in life), undue pessimism or 
feelings of guilt/worthlessness pessimism as well 
as biological features of depression, e.g. lack 
of energy, poor sleep (early morning waking), 
reduced libido. Consider undertaking a depres¬ 
sion score, such as the Geriatric Depression 
Scale in the elderly, or the PHQ-9 in younger 
adults. If you suspect depression as the cause of 
weight loss reassess weight and other symptoms 
after a period of treatment. 


7 Suspect eating disorder? 

Consider the possibility of an eating disorder 
particularly in younger women with amenorrhoea 
or a background of psychiatric or psychological 
problems. Be alert for important clues such as 
distorted attitudes to weight or body image 
(e.g. underplaying the seriousness of weight 


loss fear of gaining weight, preoccupation with 
weight issues) or concerns raised by friends/ 
family members, e.g. skipping meals, concealing 
food. Be sensitive and tactful but persistent in 
questioning and refer to specialist services if 
significant concern. 


8 


Severe systemic illness? 


Assess the severity and trajectory of chronic 
disease, e.g. heart failure, COPD or renal failure 
using symptom status, functional performance, 
frequency of hospitalization and objective markers 
(e.g. GFR FEV1). Weight loss and anorexia may 
occur in advanced disease. Seek specialist input 
to optimize management but consider the need 
for dietetic and/or palliative care input. 


9 


Cognitive impairment? 


Assess cognition formally with a mini mental 
state examination or Addenbrooke’s cognitive 
examination-ill in patients with either established 
or suspected or cognitive impairment. Wherever 
possible, obtain a collateral history from friends, 
relatives or carers to evaluate the contribution 
from cognitive impairment to weight loss, e.g. 
forgetting meals, unable to prepare food, para¬ 
noid ideas about food. In patients with more 
advanced dementia enquire about the patient’s 
ability to transfer food from plate to mouth and 
any swallowing problems. Refer patient for 
specialist evaluation, e.g. psychiatry of old age. 


10 


Consider further investigation and/or 
food diary. Explore factors contributing to 
reduced food intake 


If weight loss persists with no clear cause, 
consider Gl investigation/referral +/- CT if not 
already performed. Use a food diary to record 
calorie intake. Reconsider the possibility of a 
primary eating disorder or depression. Explore 
possible contributing factors to inadequate food 
intake including inadequate dentition, swallowing 
problems, lack of motivation (or money), impaired 
mobility (unable to get to shop) or subtle cogni¬ 
tive impairment. Refer frail, elderly patients for 
comprehensive geriatric assessment 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


















WEIGHT LOSS 


299 


Step by-step assessment 


Clinical tool 

Diagnosing diabetes and glycaemic complications 


Diagnosis of diabetes 

(Definition and diagnosis of diabetes mellitus and 
intermediate hyperglycaemia. WHO 2006; update 2011.) 
Typical presenting symptoms of diabetes include thirst, 
polyuria and unexplained weight loss. These will be more 
prominent, with a shorter history, in type 1 diabetes, due to 
absolute insulin deficiency. In type 2 diabetes, there may 
be little in the way of symptoms, or they may go unnoticed 
due to their insidious onset. Biochemical cut-offs to clinch 
the diagnosis are described in Table 34.1. In symptomatic 
patients, one laboratory measure is required to confirm 
hyperglycaemia. In asymptomatic people, two confirmatory 
tests at separate t mes are needed. 

Assessment of long-term glycaemic control 

The target HbAI c in the ongoing management of diabetes, 
to avo d the development of long-term complications, is 
widely accepted as <58 mmol/mol (<7.5%). There has 
been a recent move in updated NICE guidance (2015) to 
a tighter target of 48 mmol/mol (6.5%), if able to achieve 
this without unacceptable hypoglycaemia or impact on 
co-morbidities. American Diabetes Association guidance 
recommends a target of <53 mmol/mol (7.0%). These 
targets should, of course, be individualized in consultation 
with the person with diabetes. 

Acute complications of diabetes 
Hyperglycaemic crises 

Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is a medical emergency, and 
involves a triad of diabetes, ketosis and acidosis. It is the 
result of insulin deficiency (absolute - type 1 diabetes/ 
pancreatic disease; or relative - poorly controlled type 2 


diabetes). It develops rapidly over hours. Severity can be 
graded as mild/moderate/severe depending on the degree 
of biochemical abnormality and presence of altered mental 
status (Table 34.2). Mortality is 0.2-2% (with higher rates 
in developing countries). 

Hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state (HHS) is usually a 
complication of poorly controlled type 2 diabetes, often 
with insidious onset over days to weeks. Blood glucose 
is very high, with high osmolality and hypercoagulability. 

It is life threatening, with a 15-20% mortality rate. 

The frail elderly are most at risk. It can be complicated 
by myocardial infarction, stroke or peripheral arterial 
thrombosis In addition, overly rapid correction of metabolic 
abnormalities can lead to complications such as seizures, 
cerebral oedema and central pontine myelinolysis. It is, 
therefore, vital to correct abnormalities gradually and to 
carefully monitor the plasma osmolality ([2 x Na] + urea + 
glucose) during treatment. 

Hypoglycaemia 

Whilst there is no clear consensus on the biochemical 
definition of hypoglycaemia, it is largely accepted that 
a blood glucose <4 mmol/L (72 mg/dL) would be an 
appropriate level to trigger treatment in a person with 
diabetes. Severe hypoglycaemia is defined by the 
requirement for external assistance to restore normal 
blood glucose (whether relatives or emergency services). 
Symptoms (Table 34.3) will usually alert a person with 
diabetes to the development of hypoglycaemia, but it 
is important to be aware that some people lose their 
hypoglycaemia warning symptoms, known as impaired 
hypoglycaemia awareness, and they are at high risk of 
severe hypoglycaemia as a result. 


34 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 










WEIGHT LOSS 


Step-by-step assessment 


Table 34.1 Biochemical criteria for diagnosis of 
diabetes mellitus 


Diabetes 

Fasting plasma 
glucose 

Random plasma 
glucose 
2-hour plasma 
glucose on OGTT 1 
HbAlc 2 


>7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL) 
>11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) 
>11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) 
>48 mmol/mol (6.5%) 


Impaired fasting glycaemia 

Fasting plasma 6 1-6.9 mmol/L 

glucose (110-125 mg/dL) 

Impaired glucose tolerance 

2-hour plasma 7.8-11.0 mmol/L 

glucose on OGTT (140-200 mg/dL) 


'OGTT - Oral glucose tolerance test: venous plasma glucose in 
fasting state administer 75 g oral glucose load, repeat venous 
plasma glucose at 2 hours. 

2 Not suitable as a diagnostic test in children and young people 
or in the context of: suspected type 1 diabetes, symptoms 
for <2 months, acute illness, pregnancy, treatment with 
medications that cause rapid glucose rise (e.g. steroids, 
antipsychotics) or acute pancreatic damage/surgery. 


Table 34.3 Symptoms of hypoglycaemia 

Autonomic 

Neuroglycopenic 

Non-specific 

Palpitation 

Confusion 

Tiredness 

Sweating 

Weakness 

Nausea 

Tremor 

Dizziness 

Headache 

Hunger 

Reduced 

concentration 


Anxiety 

Incoordination 


D owsiness 

Speech difficulty 


Table 34.2 Criteria for diagnosis of DKA and HHS 


DKA 

Severe DKA 

HHS 

Plasma glucose 1 

>13.9 mmol/L (>250 mg/dL) 

- 

>33.3 mmol/L (>600 mg/dL) 

Osmolality 



>320 mOsm/kg 

Arterial pH 

<7.3 

<7.0 

>7.3 

Serum bicarbonate 

<18 mmol/L 

<10 mmol/L 

>18 mmol/L 2 

Blood ketones (capillary sample) 

>1.5 mmol/L 

- 

Negative/small 

Urine ketones 

Positive 

- 

Negative/small 

Mental status 

Alert or drowsy 

Stupor/coma 

Stupor/coma 


'If a patient with DKA has started treatment with supplementary insulin, they may present with a normal blood glucose, but still have ketosis 
and acidosis and be at risk of clinical deterioration. 

2 In some patients metabolic acidosis may be present due either to relative insulin deficiency (check ketones) or to intercurrent acute illness 
(lactic acidosis or AKI). 

Adapted from Kitabchi AEetal 2006. Hyperglycemic crises in adult patients with diabetes: a consensus statement from the American 
Diabetes Association Diabetes Care. 29(12):2739-2748. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


































Appendix 


Normal values for biochemical tests in venous blood 


Reference range 


Analyte 

SI units 

Non-SI units 

Alanine amino-transferase (ALT) 

10-50 U/L 

- 

Albumin 

35-50 g/L 

3.5-5.0 g/dL 

Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 

40-125 U/L 

- 

Aspartate amino-transferase (AST) 

10-45 U/L 

- 

Bilirubin (total) 

2-17 pmol/L 

0.12-1.0 mg/dL 

Calcium (total) 

2.12-2.62 mmol/L 

4.24-5 24 meq/L or 

8 50-10.50 mg/dL 

Chloride 

95-107 mmol/L 

95-107 meq/L 

Cholesterol (total) 

Mild increase 5.2-6.5 mmol/L 

200-250 mg/dL 


Moderate increase 6.5-7.8 mmol/L 

250-300 mg/dL 


Severe increase >7.8 mmol/L 

>300 mg/dL 

C-reactive protein (CRP) 

<5 mg/L 



Highly sensitive CRP assays also exist which may be useful 


in estimating cardiovascular risk 


Creatine kinase (CK) (total) 



Male 

55-170 U/L 

- 

Female 

30-135 U/L 

- 

Creatine kinase MB isoenzyme 

<6% of total CK 

- 

Creatinine 

60-120 prmol/L 

0.68-1.36 mg/dL 

Gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) 

5-55 U/L 

- 

Glucose (fasting) 

3.6-5.8 mmol/L 

65-104 mg/dL 

Glycated haemoglobin (HbA lc ) 

5.0-6.5% 

- 

Lactate 

0.6-2.4 mmol/L 

5.40-21.6 mg/dL 

Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (total) 

208-460 U/L 

- 

Phosphate (fasting) 

0.8-1.4 mmol/L 

2.48-4.34 mg/dL 

Potassium (plasma) 

3.3-4.7 mmol/L 

3.3-4.7 meq/L 

Potassium (serum) 

3.6-5.1 mmol/L 

3.6-5.1 meq/L 

Protein (total) 

60-80 g/L 

6-8 g/dL 

Sodium 

135-145 mmol/L 

135-145 meq/L 

Triglycerides (fasting) 

0.6-1.7 mmol/L 

53-150 mg/dL 

Urate 



Male 

012-0.42 mmol/L 

2.0-7 0 mg/dL 

Female 

0.12-0.36 mmol/L 

2.0-6 0 mg/dL 

Urea 

2.5-6.6 prmol/L 

15-40 mg/dL 

1 Note these values may vary according to local laboratory calibration. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


































302 • APPENDIX 


Arterial blood analysis 


Reference range 


Analysis 

SI units 

Non-Si units 

Bicarbonate (HC0 3 ) 

21-29 mmol/L 

21-29 meq/L 

Hydrogen ion (H + ) 

37-45 nmol/L 

pH 7.35-7.43 

PaC0 2 

4.5-6.0 kPa 

34-45 mmHg 

Pa0 2 

12-15 kPa 

90-113 mmHg 

Oxygen saturation (Sp0 2 ) 

>97% 12 


’Breathing room air. 

2 Varies with age. 


Haematological values 




Reference range 


Analysis 

SI units 

Non-SI units 

Bleeding time (ivy) 

<8 min 

- 

Blood volume 

Male 

75 ±10 mLAg 

- 

Female 

70 ±10 mLAg 


Coagulation screen 

Prothrombin time 

10.5-13.5 sec 

- 

Activated partial thromboplastin time 

26-36 sec 

- 

D-dimer 

Routine 

<0.2 mg/L 

- 

Sensitive (for venous thromboembolism) 

Variable threshold 
(dependent on method) 


Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 

Higher values may be normal in older patients 

Adult male 

0-10 mm/hr 

- 

Adult female 

3-15 mm/hr 

- 

Ferritin 

Male 

17-300 jag/L 

17-300 ng/mL 

Premenopausal female 

7-280 |ag/L 

7-280 ng/mL 

Postmenopausal female 

4-233 pig/L 

4-233 ng/mL 

Fibrinogen 

1.5-4.0 g/L 

0.15-0.4 g/dL 

Folate 

Serum 

2.0-13.5 (_ig/L 

2.0-13.5 ng/mL 

Red cell 

95-570 pg/L 

95-570 ng/mL 

Haemoglobin 

Male 

130-180 g/L 

13-18 g/dL 

Female 

115-165 g/L 

11.5-16.5 g/dL 

Haptoglobin 

0 4-2.4 g/L 

0.04-0.24 g/dL 

Iron 

Male 

14-32 pimol/L 

78-178 ng/dL 

Female 

10-28 prmol/L 

56-156 ng/dL 

Leukocytes (adults) 

4.0-11.0 x 10 9 /L 

4.0-11.0 x10 3 /mm 3 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 






























303 • APPENDIX 


Haematological values—cont’d 




Reference range 


Analysis 

SI units 

Non-SI units 

Differential white cell count 

Neutrophil granulocytes 

2.0-7.5 x 10 9 /L 

2.0-7 5 x 10 3 /mm 3 

Lymphocytes 

1.5-4.0 x10 9 /L 

1 5-4.0 x 10 3 /mm 3 

Monocytes 

0.2-0.8 x 10 9 /L 

0.2-0.8 x 10 3 /mm 3 

Eosinophil granulocytes 

0.04-0.4 x10 9 /L 

0.04-0.4 x 10 3 /mm 3 

Basophil granulocytes 

0.01-0.1 x 10 9 /L 

0.01-0.1 x10 3 /mm 3 

Mean cell haemoglobin (MCH) 

27-32 pg 

- 

Mean cell volume (MCV) 

78-98 fL 

- 

Packed cell volume (PCV) or haematocrit 

Male 

0.40-0.54 

- 

Female 

0.37-0.47 

- 

Platelets 

150-350 x 10 9 /L 

150-350 x10 3 /mm 3 

Red cell count 

Male 

4.5-6.5 x 10 12 /L 

4.5-6.5 x 10 6 /mm 3 

Female 

3.8-5.8 x 10 12 /L 

3.8-5.8 x 10 6 /mm 3 

Red cell lifespan 

Mean 

120 days 

- 

Half-life f'Cr) 

25-35 days 

- 

Reticulocytes (adults) 

25-85 x 10 9 /L 

25-85 x 10 3 /mm 3 

Transferrin 

2.0-4.0 g/L 

0.2-0.4 g/dL 

Transferrin saturation 

Male 

25-56% 

- 

Female 

14-51% 

- 

Vitamin B 12 

130-770 pg/mL 

- 

Source: Reproduced with permission from Innes JA. Davidson’s Essentials of Medicine. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2009. 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



















This page intentionally left blank 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



Page numbers followed by ‘7’ indicate figures, T indicate tables, and 


Abbreviated Mental Test score, 

218 

ABODE assessment process, 7, 
8b-10b, 115 

Abdominal pain, 24-45, 307 
acute 24-25, 257 
gynaecological pathology, 

40 

lower, 387 

bedside pregnancy test in 
patient with, 39 
chronic relapsing, 42, 427 
clinical/laboratory features 
suggesting organic disease, 
45 

cyclical pain and, 44 
jaundice, 43-44 
left lower quadrant, 25b, 39 
leucocytes/nitrites on 
urinalysis, 40 
loin pain/haematuria, 44 
lower Gl symptoms with 
alarm features, 43 
palpable mass, weight loss, 
systemic upset/unexplained 
jaundice, 44 
upper Gl symptoms with 
alarm features, 43 
Abnormal pleural fluid 
collections, 129b 
Abrupt decline, in mobility, 218 
Accidental trip, 214, 2167 
diagnosis of, 217b 
Achalasia, 109 

Acid-base status, assessment 

of, 116b 

Acoustic neuroma, vertigo and. 

96 

Acute alcoholic hepatitis, 174 
Acute angle closure glaucoma, 
252-253, 2537, 255 
Acute asthma exacerbation, 
assessment of, 122, 122f 
Acute chest pain, 50-52, 607 
Acute coronary syndrome, 50, 
51b 

clinical probability of, 63 
history consistent with, 62 


low clinical probability of, 52b, 
63, 63b-64b 
Acute delirium, 218 
Acute diarrhoea, 25b, 32 
Acute drug eruptions, 249 
Acute drug-induced liver injury, 
174, 175b 

Acute dyspnoea 112 
cardiovascular causes of, 112 
in COPD, 115 
lower airway disease, 112 
overview for, 1147 
parenchymal lung disease, 

112 

respiratory causes of, 112 
step-by-step assessment for, 
115-119 

upper airway obstruction, 112 
Acute erythroderma, 240 
Acute febrile illnesses, 141 
Acute fever, 145 
Acute generalized skin eruption, 
240-249 

Acute glaucoma, headache and, 
167, 172 

Acute haemorrhage, 
resuscitation in, 153b 
Acute iritis, 252 

Acute large joint swellings, 1 87 
Acute liver failure, 174, 175b 
identify patients with, 

179-180 

liver transplantation in, 180b 
monitor and reassess patients 
with, 180 
Acute liver injury 
cause of, 180 
jaundice and, 174-176 
Acute mesenteric ischaemia, 
28-29 

Acute non-neuroloqical illness, 

205 

Acute pancreatitis, 28 
modified Glasgow criteria 
and, 35b 

Acute pericarditis, 51 
ECG in, 54b-58b, 597 
Acute pyelonephritis, haematuria 
and, 158 


Index 

‘b’ indicate boxes. 


Acute rectal bleeding, 156 
Acute red eye, 250, 250b 
Acute renal impairment, nausea 
and vomiting and, 225, 
230-231, 230b 
Acute small bowel ischaemia, 
151 

Acute viral hepatitis, 174 
Addenbrooke’s cognitive 
examination-ill, 298 
Adrenal crisis, 265 
Adrenal insufficiency, 134 
nausea and vomiting and, 
223, 223 b 

Adult-onset Still’s disease, 149 
Advanced myopathy, 202 
Airflow obstruction, severity of, 

1277 
Airway 

assessment of, 8b-10b 
obstruction, 121 

Alanine amino-transferase (ALT), 
normal values of, 302f 
Albumin, normal values of, 302f 
Alcohol intoxication, acute, 84 
Alcohol toxicity, 76-77, 76f 
Alcohol withdrawal, 84 
Alcoholic hepatitis, 181 
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 
normal values of 302f 
Allopurinol, 240 
Altered consciousness, 72-77, 
747 

confusion and, 81 
Ambulatory smart phone 
monitors, 237 
American College of 
Rheumatology/European 
League Against Rheumatism 
classification criteria, for 
rheumatoid arthritis, 185f 
Amylase, 35-36 
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. 
199 

Anaemia 

assessment of, 136-137 
fatigue and, 133 
nausea and vomitinq and, 

229 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


306 • INDEX 


Anaphylaxis 265, 268f 
ANCA-negative systemic 
vasculitis, 149 
Angina 

assessment of, 71 
chronic dyspnoea and, 1 28 
pectoris, 52 
symptom score, 63b 
Angiodysplasia (arteriovenous 
malformation), 151 
Angioedema, 243-244 
Anhedonia, 135, 298 
Ankylosing spondylitis, 208 
Anorectal bleeding, 150-151 
Anorexia, 294-295 
nausea and vomiting and, 

229 

Anterior uveitis 252 
Anticonvulsants 240 
Anxiety, 52-53 
Aortic dissection, 50, 61-62, 

61b 

ECG in, 54b-58b 

Appendicitis, 39 
Apraxia, 221 
Arrhythmia, 96 

Arrhythmia-related syncope, 270 
Arterial blood analysis, 3037 
Arterial blood gases, 116b, 116f 
analysis, metabolic acidosis 
by, 119 
Ascites, 179 

Aspartate amino-transferase 
(AST), normal values of, 302f 
Asplenia, 144 
Assessment, 7-16 
clinical examination, 11-15, 
13f 

history 11, 11b-12b, Ilf 
inspection, 16 
investigations, 15 
Asterixis, examining for, 1807 
Asthma, 53 
Asymptomatic rhythm 
disturbances, 237-238 
Ataxia, 220 
unsteadiness and, 97 
Atrial fibrillation, 232-233, 2347 
assessment of, 239 
causes of, 234b 
Atrial flutter, 232, 2347 
assessment of, 239 
Atrial tachycardia, 232-233 
Atrophic vaginitis, 285 
Atypical infection, haematuria 
and, 158-159 
Autoimmune causes, of 
jaundice, 177 
Autoimmune hepatitis, 174 

B 

Bacillus cereus , gastroenteritis 
caused by, 222 


Bacterial conjunctivitis, 250 
Bacterial urinary tract infection, 
haematuria and, 158 
Balance, impaired 99 
Bamford classification, of stroke, 
207, 207b 

Baseline cognitive function, 
normal, 81 

Baseline cognitive impairment, 
delirium and, 84 
Baseline lung function, 121 
Bedside pregnancy test, in 
patient with abdominal pain, 
39 

Bell's palsy, 255 
Benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo (BPPV), vertigo and, 

96 

Benign stricture, 108-109 
jaundice and, 177 
Benign thunderclap headache, 

166 

Bilateral limb weakness 
acute-onset, 199 
muscle fatigability, 201-202 
overview of, 198, 1987 
proximal weakness with 
tenderness, 202 
sensory signs or symptoms 
of, 201 

upper motor neuron signs of, 

199-201 

Bilateral lower limb neurology, 

212 

Bilateral lower limb oedema, 

195 

Bilateral oedema, 190-191 
Biliary colic, 277, 28 
characteristics of, 36-37 
Bilirubin, normal values of, 302f 
Binge drinking, 181 
Biochemical tests, in venous 
blood, normal values for, 302f 
Blackout, mobility problems, 
217-218 

Bladder, palpable, 87 
Bleeding 

anorectal, 150-151 
assessment of, 2907 
bright red, 151 

confined to menstruation, 292 
heavy menstrual, 288 
intermenstrual, 289, 292 
postcoital, 292 
postmenopausal, 289, 
291-292 

pregnancy-related, 288 
rectal, 150-157 
acute 156 
angiodysplasia 
(arteriovenous 
malformation) and, 151 
clinical features of, 157 


colorectal carcinoma and, 
151 

diverticular disease and, 

151 

high-risk, 157, 157b 
inflammatory bowel disease 
and, 151 

ischaemic colitis and, 151 
overview of 1 56, 1567 
perianal disorders and, 151 
resuscitation in, 156 
risk factor for, 157, 157b 
upper Gl source of, 
156-157 
risk score, 2387 
vaginal, 288-292 
assessment of, 2907 
examination of, 291b, 2917 
in first trimester, 288 
pregnancy and, 291 
in second and third 
trimester, 288 
shock in, 291 
Blepharitis, 251 
Blisters, present of, 247-248 
Blood 

analysis, arterial, 3037 
film, abnormalities on, 134 
normal values for biochemical 
tests in venous, 3027 
Blue boxes, 19, 207 
Body surface area 
erythematous, 247, 247b 
Bone cancer, and secondary 
deposits, 185 
Bone marrow failure, 137 
BPPV. see Benign paroxysmal 
positional vertigo 
Bradyarrhythmias, 234, 2687 
assessment of, 239 
Bradycardia, fatigue and, 133 
Brainstem pathology, vertigo 
and, 96 

Brain-type natriuretic peptide 
(BNP) testing, 118 
Breast abscess, 46 
Breast cancer, 46, 46b 
Breast lump, 46-49, 487 
abscess, evidence of, 49 
discrete lump palpable, 49 
features of/risk factors for 
breast cancer, 46b, 49, 

49b 

Breathing, assessment of, 

8b-10b 

Bright red bleeding, 151 
Bronchiectasis, 162, 165 
Brugada syndrome, 2817 
Budd-Chiari syndrome, see 
Hepatic vein thrombosis 
Bulbar palsy, 108, 1097 
Bulimia, 294-295 
Bursitis, 184 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


307 • INDEX 


c 

Calcium, normal values of, 302f 
Cancer 

of breast, 46, 46b 
of colon, 29 
red flags for, 213 
Carbon monoxide poisoning, 77 
Cardiac syncope, 270 
Cardiac tamponade, 265, 2687 
Cardiogenic lower limb oedema, 
190 

Cardiogenic shock, 264, 269 
Cardiorespiratory dysfunction 

134 

Cataplexy, 271 

Cauda equina syndrome, 209 
Cavitating lung lesion, 1637 
CCF. see Congestive cardiac 
failure 

CDI. see Clostridium difficile 
infection 
Cellulits, 260 
Central nervous system 
causes, 73 
infection, 75 

Cerebral venous thrombosis, 

166 

Chagas disease, 109 
Chest pain, 50-71, 54b-58b 
acute, 50-52, 60 f 
aortic dissection, 50 
intermittent, 52-53 
non-cardiac causes of 64 
Chest X-ray (CXR) 
abnormality, acute dyspnea 
and, 118-119, 1187 
in lung cancer, 163b 
Child-Pugh classification, of 
cirrhosis, 182, 1827 
Chloride, normal values of, 3027 
Cholangiocarcinoma, 177 
Cholecystitis, 176 
Choledocholithiasis, 28 
Cholesterol, normal values of, 
3027 

Chronic abdominal pain, 28-29 
Chronic alcohol excess, 181 
Chronic back pain, 47 
Chronic cognitive impairment, 

79 

Chronic dermatosis, 249 
Chronic dyspnoea 
abnormal PFTs in, 126-127 
alarm features in, 125-126, 
125b 

cardiovascular causes of, 113 
coronary artery disease and, 

128 

CT abnormality in, 126, 126b 
echocardiographic 
abnormality in, 127 
overview for, 1247 
pleural effusion in, 125 


related to exertion, 125 
respiratory causes of, 113 
step-by-step assessment for, 
125-128 

unexplained hypoxia, 128 
Chronic fatigue syndrome, 47, 

135, 135b 

Chronic heart failure, chronic 
dyspnoea and, 127 
Chronic liver disease, 134, 176b 
assessment of, 182 
evidence of, 179 
Chronic mesenteric ischaemia, 
28-29 

Chronic non-haematological 
disease, 137 

Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) 
assessment of acute 
dyspnoea in, 115, 121 
clinical features of, 1177 
Chronic pain syndrome, 47 
Chronic pancreatitis, 28 
Chronic relapsing abdominal 
pain, 42 427 

Chronic renal failure, 222, 2307 
Chronic subdural haematoma, 

166 

Chronic venous insufficiency, leg 
swelling and, 191, 191b, 194 
Chronological age, 15 
Circle of Willis, CT angiography, 

201 

Circulation, assessment of, 
8b-10b 

Cirrhosis, 176, 176b 
Clinical examination 11-15, 
12b-13b, 137 

Clostridium difficie infection 
(CDI), 90 

Cluster headache, 166 
Coagulation, problems with, 
jaundice and, 174 
Cognitive function, normal, 

81 

Cognitive impairment, 80b, 218, 
298 

chronic, 79 
Colon cancer, 29 
Colonic ulcer, 151 
Colonoscopy, 157 
Colorectal cancer, 90-91, 

151 

Coma, 72-77, 747 
Compartment syndrome, 191, 
193, 193b 
Confusion, 78-89 
acute cognitive function, 
fluctuating course, altered 
consciousness/attention, 81 
assessment method, 14 
chronic, 89 
depression, 81 


disorders mimicking, 79 
normal cognitive function, 81 
overview, 80, 807 
Congestive cardiac failure (CCF), 

190 

Conjunctivitis, 188, 250, 2517 
allergic, 255 

Connective tissue disorders, 
fever and, 139 
Consciousness, 72 
altered, 72-77, 747 
Constipation, 87 
nausea and vomiting, 222 
Continuous incontinence, 283 
Conus medullaris syndrome, 

285 

Coordination, tests of, 147 
COPD. see Chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease 
Core temperature, 75 
Coronary artery disease, 1 28 
Cortical dysfunction, 197b 
C-reactive protein (CRP) normal 
values of, 3027 
Creatinine, normal values of, 
3027 

Creatinine kinase (CK), normal 
values of, 3027 
Creatinine kinase MB 
isoenzyme, normal values of, 

3027 

Crohn’s disease, rectal bleeding 
and, 151 

Crystal arthropathy, joint 
swelling and, 184 
Crystal-induced arthropathy, 

187 

CURB-65 score, 123, 1237 

D 

Deep vein thrombosis (DVT), 
oedema and, 190-191 
Delirium, 78-79 79b 
alcohol excess/dependence, 
84 

assessment test for, 80b 
capillary BG, 83 
causes, 79 

drug toxicity and, 83-84 
drugs and, 78 
infection and, 78 
high risk of, 85 
intracranial causes, 78 
intracranial pathology, hiqh 
risk of, 83 

liver disease, suspected, 84 
meningitis, suspect, 83 
metabolic disturbance, 83 
metabolic/physiological 
disturbance, 78 
normal baseline cognitive 
function, 81 
overview, 82, 827 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


308 • INDEX 


Delirium (Continued) 
in vulnerable brain, 86, 86f 
step-by-step assessment, 

87 

Dementia, 78 
causes, 79 

chronic cognitive impairment, 

79 

reversible causes, 79 
Dendritic conjunctival ulcer, 255 f 
Dependent/gravitational 
oedema, 191 
Depression 
in elderly, 1 6 

weight loss and, 294-295 
Dermatitis, 240, 2417 
Dermatitis herpetiformis, 
242-243, 2437 247-248 
Dermatomes, 2007 
Diabetes mellitus 
diagnosis of, 3007 
fatigue and, 133 
nausea and vomitinq and, 

229 

weight loss and, 299b 
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), 
222-223, 299b 
criteria for diagnosis of, 3007 
Diagnosis, 3-6 
of exclusion, 3 
patient comes with, 6 
treatment before, 5-6 
Diagnostic ECG recording, 279 
Diagnostic guides, 19-21, 207 
Diagnostic methods, 1 7-18 
pattern recognition, 17 
probability analysis, 1 7-18 
Diagnostic process, 17-21 
Diagnostic tests, 3-4 
Diarrhoea, 90-95 
acute renal impairment, 92 
bloody, 91b, 93 
causes, 91 

chronic/relapsing, overview, 

94, 947 

alarm features, 95 
drug culprit, 947, 95 
infection risk, 95 
organic disease, clinical/ 
laboratory features, 95 
steatorrhoea, 95 
stool, hard/impacted, 95 
Clostridium dificile infection, 
93, 93b 

dehydration, clinical evidence 
of, 92 

drug related, 90, 91b, 93 
infectious, 90 

inflammatory bowel disease, 
91,91b 

irritable bowel syndrome, 90, 

90b 


malabsorption, disorders 
causes, 91 
overview, 92, 927 
protozoal infection, risk of, 93 
shock and 92 
Dieulafoy’s lesion, 150 
Differential diagnosis, 3 
Diffuse oesophageal spasm, 

109 

Diffusion capacity, 1277 
Disability, assessment of, 

8b-10b 

Disc herniation, lumbar, 208 
examination, 2107 
Distributive shock, 265, 269 
Diverticular disease, 151 
Dix-Hallpike test, 101,1037 
Dizziness, 96-107 
disorders causes, 97 
initial assessment, overview, 
98, 987 

illusory sense of motion, 99 
impaired baance, 99 
light-headedness, 99 
loss of consciousness, 99 
presyncope, 99 
transient focal neurological 
deficit, 99 
unsteadiness, 99 
mobility problems, 217-218 
DKA. see Diabetic ketoacidosis 
Drugs, 72 

diarrhoea caused by, 90, 91b 
shock caused by, 265 
toxicity, 76-77, 767 
Duodenitis, 150 

DVT. see Deep vein thrombosis 
Dysphagia, 1 08-111 
oesophageal 
dysmotility, 109 
structural, 108-109 
oropharyngeal, 108 
Dyspnoea, 1 12-129 
acute, 112 

cardiovascular causes of, 
112 

in COPD, 115 
lower airway disease, 112 
overview for, 1147 
parenchymal lung disease, 
112 

respiratory causes of, 112 
step-by-step assessment 
for, 115-119 
upper airway obstruction, 
112 

chronic, 112-113 
abnormal PFTs in, 126-127 
alarm features in, 125-126, 
125b 

cardiovascular causes of, 
113 


coronary artery disease 
and, 128 

CT abnormality in, 126, 
126b 

echocardiographic 
abnormality in 127 
overview for, 1247 
pleural effusion in, 125 
related to exertion, 125 
respiratory causes of, 113 
step-by-step assessment 
for, 125-128 
unexplained hypoxia, 128 

E 

Eating disorder, nausea and 
vomiting and, 229 
Echocardiography 
abnormality, in chronic 
dyspnoea, 127 
for heart failure, 118 
Ectopic pregnancy, bleeding 
due to, 288 
Ectropion, 251 
Eczema, 240 
Eczema herpeticum, 240 
Embolism, pulmonary 
assessment of suspected, 
1207 

clinical suspicion of, 1 19, 

1197 

Wells score, 1207, 1207 
Emotional distress, 53 
Encephalitis, 197 
Encephalopathy, hepatic 
features of, 1 79-180 
West Haven grading of, 1757, 
179 

Endocrine disorders, weight loss 
and, 294 

Endometriosis, 44 
ENT investigation, abnormality 
on, 1107, 111 
Enthesopathies 184 
Entropion, 251, 2537 
Epididymal cyst, 260 
Epididymitis, 2597, 260 
Epididymo-orchitis, 260 
Ep lepsy, 270 
diagnosis of, 277 
Episcleritis, 252, 2537 
Episodic abdominal pain, 

28-29 

Erythema multiforme, 240-242, 
2427 

Erythroderma, 240, 2417 
acute, 240 
Exanthem, 244-245 
Exercise tolerance, 221 
Exposure, assessment of, 
8b-10b 

Extrahepatic cholestasis, 176 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


309 • INDEX 


Extrasystoles 232 
assessment of, 239 
history of, 237 

Extravascular haemolysis, 136 
Extrinsic compression, 109 
Eyelashes, abnormality of, 255 
Eyelid, abnormality of, 255 

F 

Fat necrosis, 47 
Fatigue, 130-137, 238 
cardiac causes for, 130 
chronic inflammatory 
conditions for. 130 
endocrine causes fo , 130 
haematological causes for, 

130 

infection and 130 
malignancy of, 130 
medications for, 130 
non-organic causes of, 130 
overview for, 132 f 
presentations of, 131b 
respiratory causes for, 1 30 
step-by-step assessment for, 
133-135 

FBC abnormalities, 134 
Fever, 138-149 
acute, 145 

clinical findings/initial tests for, 
144-145 
CNS and, 138 
connective tissue disorders 
and, 139 
drugs, 139 
ENT and, 138-139 
genitourinary tract and, 138 
Gl causes for, 138 
immunocompromised patients 
and, 139 

infection and, 138-139, 144 
malignancy of, 139 
musculoskeletal causes for, 

138 

non-infective cause for, 141 
overview of, 140, 140 f 
persistent, 145 
recurrent, 145 
respiratory system and 138 
returning travellers and, 139 
skin/soft tissue and, 138 
step-by-step assessment for, 
141-145 

Fibroadenoma, 46 
Fibrocystic change, 46-47 
Fibromyalgia, 4f 
Filariasis lymphatic, 260 
Fluorescein staining, 255 
Focal limb weakness, 217-218 
Food bolus obstruction, 108 
Foreign body, in the eye, 
250-251, 252f 


Fournier’s gangrene, 260 
Frail, elderly patient, assessment 
of, 15-16 

Frank haemoptysis 162 
Frank pus, 255 
Free air on CXR, 3If, 35 
Frontal headache, 172-173 
Full clinical assessment, 7-15 
Functional disorders, 29 
Functional incontinence, 283 
Functional syndrome, 4, 4f 

G 

Gait 

abnormality, 221 
apraxia, 221 

assessment, 215b, 220 f 
Gallstones, 28 
jaundice and, 176 
Gamma-glutamyl transferase 
(GGT), normal values of, 302f 
Gastric cancer, 28 
Gastric varices, 150 
Gastritis, 37, 150 
Gastrocnemius muscle rupture, 
193 

Gastroduodenal disorders, 28 
Gastroenteritis, 222, 226 
Gastro-esophageal disorders, 

51-53 

Gastrointestinal haemorrhage, 
150-157 

Gastrointestinal obstruction, 222 
Gastro-oesophageal reflux, 
benign stricture and, 108-109 
Gastroparesis, 222 
Generalized oedema, 190 
Generalized peritonitis, 31, 31 f 
Generalized wheeze 118 
Geriatric Depression Scale, 81, 
298 

GGT. see Gamma-glutamyl 
transferase 

Giant cell arteritis, see Temporal 
arteritis 

Gilbert’s syndrome, 174 
Glasgow Coma Scale, 72, 

73f 

Glomerulonephritis, 231 
Glucocorticoid deficiency, 265 
Glucose (fasting), normal values 

of, 302f 

Glycated haemoglobin, normal 
values of, 302f 
Gout, 184 

Green boxes, 20f 21 
Guillain-Barre syndrome, 201, 

201 f 

Guttate psoriasis, 240, 242f 
249 

Gynaecological conditions, 29 
Gynaecomastia, 47 


Haematemesis, 150-157 
active bleeding in, 154 
forceful retching/vomiting in, 

154 

gastritis/duodenitis and, 150 
Mallory-Weiss tear and, 150 
oesophageal/gastric varices 
and, 150 

oesophagitis and, 150 
overview of, 152, 152f 
peptic ulcer and, 150 
resuscitation in, 153, 153b 
upper Gl malignancy and, 

150 

variceal bleeding in, 154 
Haematological malignancy, 

137 

Haematological values, 

303f-304f 

Haematuria, 158-161 
abdominal pain and, 44 
atypical infection and 
158-159 

bacterial urinary tract infection 
and, 158 

benign cause of, 161 
clinical suspicion of, 

161 

overview of, 160, 160 f 
persistent, 161 
renal colic and, 1 61 
renal disease and, 159 
stones and, 158 
symptomatic, 161 
tumours and, 158 
urine discoloration other than, 
159 b 

UTI and, 161 
visible, 161 

Haemolysis, investigate for, 

136-137 

Haemolytic disorders, 174, 

175b 

Haemolytic uraemic syndrome, 

231 

Haemoptysis, 162-165 
bronchiectasis and, 162 
lung tumours and, 162 
massive, 164-165 
other causes/further 
investigation for, 165 
overview of, 164, 164 f 
pulmonary embolism and, 

162 

respiratory tract infections 
and, 162 
true, 164 

Haemorrhage, 264 
Head injury, 76 
neuroimaging of, 217b 
Head thrust test 101b 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


310 • INDEX 


Headache, 166-173 
acute glaucoma and, 167, 
172 

acute intracranial pathology 
of, 169-172 
cluster, 166 
CSF results in, 1717 
diagnostic criteria for, 173f 
features of, 1 73, 173f 
'first or worst’ presentation 
of, 169 

frontal, 172-173 

LP and CSF interpretation in, 

170b 

medication overuse, 167 
meningitis and, 166 
migraine and, 166, 167b 
nausea and vomitinq and, 

229 

overview of, 168, 1687 
raised intracranial pressure 
and, 167 
sinusitis and, 167 
subarachnoid haemorrhage 
and, 166 

'sudden-onset’, 172 
temporal arteritis (giant cell 
arteritis) and, 167 
tension, 167 
vascular causes of, 166 
Head-tilt, chin-lift method, 107 
Heart block, 2797 
Heart failure 

clinical features of, 116-118, 
1917 

symptoms of, 1 94 
Heartbeat, normal, 232, 237 
Heatstroke, 141 
Heavy menstrual bleeding, 288 
Hemiplegic gait, 221 
Hepatic encephalopathy 
features of, 1 79-180 
West Haven grading of, 1757, 
179 

Hepatic tumours, jaundice and, 
176 

Hepatic vein thrombosis (Budd- 
Chiari syndrome), 176 
Hepatocellular insufficiency, 176 
Herniated bowel, 258 
Herpes simplex virus infection, 
255 

Herpes zoster, 2487 
HHS. see Hyperosmolar 
hyperglycaemic state 
Hiatus hernia, 109 
High fracture, 219 
High systemic venous 
hydrostatic pressure, 190 
History, 11, 11b-12b, 117 
HIV infection, risk of, 134 
Holter monitoring, 237 
Hydrocoele, 258, 263 


Hypercalcaemia 
fatigue and, 133 
nausea and vomiting and, 

223, 229 

Hyperglycaemia, weight loss 
and, 297 

Hyperinflation, 1177 
Hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic 
state (HHS), 222-223 
criteria for diagnosis of, 3007 
Hypertension, 231 
pulmonary, chronic dyspnoea 
and, 127 

Hypoactive delirium, 78 
Hypoalbuminaemia, leg swelling 
and, 190, 194 

Hypoqlycaemia, 5, 270, 273, 
276, 299b 
symptoms of, 3007 
Hyponatraemia, 88-89 
Hypotension, 141, 205 
Hypothyroidism, fatigue and, 
133 

Hypovolaemic shock, 264-265 
clinical features of, 153b, 154 
Hypoxia 141 
unexplained, 128 


I 

Icteric leptospirosis (Weil’s 
disease), 174 

Idiopathic cyclic oedema, 190 
Idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension, 167 
Illicit drug use or poisoning, 
delirium and, 83 
Illusory sense of motion, 99 
Immobility, 214 

Immunocompromised patients, 
fever and, 139 
Immunoglobulin E (IgE), 

243-244 

Impetigo, 240, 2417 
Incontinence 
continuous, 283 
functional/multifactorial, 

283 

mixed, 282 
overflow, 282 
stress, 282 
urge, 282 
urinary, 282-286 
Infection 
delirium and, 78 
fatigue and, 130 
fever and, 138-139, 144 
shock and, 269 
vomiting and, 222 
weight loss and, 297-298 
Infectious diarrhoea, 90 
Infective endocarditis, 144b 
Infective pustulosis, 249 
Inflammatory back pain, 208 


Inflammatory bowel disease, 29, 
91, 91b, 151 

Inflammatory response, 25b, 36 
Inguinal hernia, 258, 2597 
Inspection, 14b, 16 
Instability, 214 

Intermenstrual bleedinq, 289, 
292 

Intermittent chest pain, 52-53 
overview, 51b-52b, 63b-64b, 
68, 687 

Interstitial lung disease, 1 267 
Intestinal obstruction, 32, 327 
Intracerebellar haemorrhage, 

166 

Intracranial pressure, raised 
and headache, 167 
symptoms and signs 
suggestive of, 199b 
Intravascular haemolysis, 1 36 
Investigations, 15 
Iritis, 2537 
Iron deficiency, 136 
Irritable bowel syndrome, 47, 

90, 90b 

Ischaematic ECG changes, 51b, 
61-63, 61b 

Ischaemia, ECG evidence of, 35 
Ischaemic colitis, 151 
Ischaemic ECG changes, in 
acute dyspnoea, 1 19 
Ischaemic hepatitis (‘shock 
liver’), 176 

Isolated scrotal skin oedema, 

263 

J 

Jaundice, 36, 174-182, 

228 

abdominal pain and, 43-44 
drug culprit for, 1 81 
full liver screen in, 181 
hepatic causes of 174-176 
overview of, 178, 1787 
post-hepatic/biliary causes of, 
176-177 

pre-hepatic causes of, 174 
screening investigations in, 
181b 

Jaw jerk, 1 08, 1097 
Jaw-thrust method, 107 
Joint aspiration, 187, 1887 
Joint swelling, 184-188 
acute large, 187 
articular conditions for, 
184-185 
evidence of, 188 
overview of, 186, 186 
periarticular conditions of, 

184 

significant trauma of, 187 
Jones criteria, for diagnosis of 
rheumatic fever, 148b 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


311 • INDEX 


K 

Keratitis, 251-252 
King’s College Hospital criteria, 
for I ver transplantation in 
acute liver failure, 180b 
Kussmaul’s sign, 265 


Lactate, normal values of, 302f 
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 
normal values of, 302f 
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic 
syndrome, 202 
LDH. see Lactate 
dehydrogenase 
Left lower lobe collapse, 1637 
Left ventricular dysfunction, 264 
Left ventricular failure, 1 187 
Left-sided hernias, 258 
Leg swelling, 190-195 
acute onset, 193 
overview of, 192, 1927 
We Is score, 193, 193f 
Light-headedness, 99 
disorders causing, 96 
overview, 104, 1047 
step-by-step assessment, 
105 

Likelihood ratio (LR), 17-18 
Limb weakness, 196-207 
bilateral 

acute-onset, 199 
overview of, 198, 1987 
proximal weakness with 
tenderness, 202 
sensory signs or symptoms 
of, 201 

upper motor neuron signs 
of, 199-201 

motor neuron disease and, 
196-197 

peripheral nerve lesions and, 

196 

space-occupying lesions and, 

196 

spinal cord lesions and, 196 
stroke and, 196 
transient ischaemic attack 
and, 196 

unilateral, 199, 204, 2047 
overview of, 204, 2047 
signs referable to, 206 
sudden onset, 205 
upper motor neuron signs 
of, 206 

Lipoedema, 191 
Liver failure, acute, 174, 

175b 

identify patients with, 

179-180 

liver transplantation in, 180b 
monitor and reassess patients 
with, 180 


Liver transplantation, in acute 
liver failure, 180b 
Lobar collapse, 1 19 
Local lymph node dissection/ 
radiotherapy, 194 
Loin pain, 44 

Loss of consciousness, 99 
Low back pain, 208-213 
Lower airway disease, 112 
Lower limb weakness, 220 
Lumbar disc herniation, 208 
examination, 2107 
Lumbar spine stenosis, 208 
examination, 2107, 211b 
movements of, 2117 
Lump, in breast, 46-49 
Lung cancer, 165 
Lunq tumours, haemoptysis 
and, 162 

Lung volumes, 1277 
Lymphadenopathy 
fatigue and, 134 
weight loss and, 297 
Lymphatic filariasis, 260 
Lymphoedema, leg swelling 
and, 191 


M 

Macleod’s Clinical Examination , 
7 

Malaria parasites, 136 
Male breast disease, 47 
Malignancy, of jaundice, 177 
Malignant hyperthermia, 141 
Malignant stricture, 108 
Mallory-Weiss tear, 150 
Mantoux test, 134 
Massive haemoptysis, 

164-165 

MCV. see Mean cell volume 
Mean cell volume (MCV), 136 
Mechanical back pain, 208, 213 
Medical Research Council 
(MRC) 

dyspnoea scale, 112, 113b 
power rating, for limb 
weakness, 199, 1997 
Medically unexplained 
symptoms, 4-5 

Medication, prescribed, delirium 
and, 83-84 

Medication overuse headache, 
167 

Meniere’s disease, vertigo and, 

96 

Meningism, 169b, 1697 
Meningitis 
features of 169 
headache and, 166 
Meningococcal sepsis, 248 
Meningoencephalitis, 205 
Menorrhagia, 288 
Mental test, 14-15, 14b 


Mesenteric ischaemia, 28-29 
CT angiography for, 33 
Metabolic acidosis, 117b, 231 
Metabolic alkalosis, 117b 
Metabolic bone disease 231 
Metabolic causes, 72 
Migraine, 166, 167b, 197 
Minor disturbance, of 
consciousness, 72 
Mirizzi's syndrome, 176 
Miscarriage, bleeding due to. 
288 

Mixed incontinence, 282 
Mobility problems, 214-221 
abrupt decline in, 218 
accidental trip, 214 
acute illness, 214, 215b, 

2167, 218b 
blackout/dizziness, 

217-218 

gait assessment for, 215b 
multifactorial, 214, 2167, 

219 

related to stumble, 217 
secondary, 214 
significant injuries, 217 
step-by-step assessment, 
217-219 

Mobitz type I atrioventricular 
block, 2807 

Mobitz type II atrioventricular 
block, 2797 

Modified Duke criteria, for 
diagnosis of infective 
endocarditis, 144b 
Modified Glasgow criteria, for 
acute pancreatitis prognosis 
35 b 

Monoarthropathy, 
polyarthropathy presenting 
as, 185 

Motor neuron disease, limb 
weakness and, 196-197, 206 
MRI spine, 212 
Multifactorial incontinence, 

283 

Multifactorial mobility problems, 
214, 2167 

Multiple sclerosis, 197 
Multiple spider naevi, 179 
Multisensory impairment, 
unsteadiness and, 97 
Muscle fatigability, 11 07, 111, 
201-202 

Muscle weakness, 1 107, 111 
Musculoskeletal disorders, 53 
chest pain and, 52 
Myasthenia gravis, 108, 197, 

201 

tendon reflex in, 202 
Myocardial infarction, 51b, 264, 
2687 

Myositis, 202 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


312 • INDEX 


N 

Naloxone, 5-6, 75 
Narcolepsy, 271 
Nausea and vomiting, 222-231 
acute renal impairment in, 
225, 230-231, 230b 
adrenal insufficiency and, 

223, 223b 
anaemia and, 229 
anorexia and, 229 
assessment of, 224/ 
atypical presentation in, 227 
blood examination for, 
228-229 
causes of, 223b 
chronic, 223, 228 228/ 
diabetes and, 229 
diagnosis of, 225 
eating disorder and, 229 
functional vomiting, 223 
Gl infect on and, 227, 229 
headache and, 229 
hypercalcaemia and, 223, 

229 

illness severity of, 225 
infection and, 222 
IV fluids for, 225 
medications and, 222, 226 
metabolic abnormality in, 226 
metabolic disturbance and, 
222-223 

pregnancy and, 223, 225 
raised intracranial pressure 
and, 223 

renal failure and, 229 
Nerve root compression, 206, 
206f 

Neurogenic claudication, 213 
Neurogenic shock, 265 
Neuroleptic malignant 
syndrome, 141 

Neurological abnormality, 11 0f, 
111, 218, 220 f 
New-onset seizures, 205 
Nicorandil, 151 
Nipple lesions, 47 
Non-pitting oedema, 1 94 
Non-seminomatous germ cell 
tumours (NSGCTs), 258 
Non-ST elevation myocardial 
infarction (NSTEMI). see 
Unstable angina/NSTEMI 
Non-ulcer dyspepsia, 29 
Non-visible haematuria, 158 
Normocyt c anaemia, 136-137 
NSGCT see Non- 
sem nomatous germ cell 
tumours 

O 

Obesity, chronic dyspnoea and, 

128 

Obstructive shock, 264 


Oedema, 190 
bilateral, 190-191 
cardiogenic lower limb, 190 
dependent/gravitational, 191 
generalized, 190 
iatrogenic causes of, 190, 
191b, 195 

idiopathic cyclic, 190 
local causes of, 190-191 
non-pitting, 194 
unilateral, 190, 193, 195 
Oesophageal dysphagia 
dysmotility, 109 
structural, 108-109 
Oesophageal spasm, 52-53 
Oesophageal varices, 150 
Oesophageal webs, 108-109 
Oesophagitis, 150 
Oliguria, 141 
Opioid toxicity, 5-6, 75 
Orchitis, 258 
Organ failure, 73 
Oropharyngeal dysphagia, 108, 
110-111 11 Of 
Orthostatic hypotension, 96 
Orthostatic syncope, 270 
Osteoarthritis, 185 
Osteoporosis, 212 
Overflow incontinence, 282 
Oxygenation 
adequacy of, in acute 
dyspnoea, 115 
assessment of, 116b 


P 

Pain 

of abdomen, 24-45, 30 f 
acute, 24-25, 25 f 
acute gynaecological 
pathology, 40 
acute lower, 38 f 
bedside pregnancy test in 
patient with, 39 
chronic relapsing abdominal 
pain, 42, 42/ 

clinical/laboratory features 
suggest organic disease, 
45 

endometriosis and, 44 
jaundice, 43-44 
left lower quadrant, 25b, 39 
leucocytes/nitrites on 
urinalysis, 40 
loin pain/haematuria 44 
lower Gl symptoms with 
alarm features 43 
palpable mass weight 
loss, systemic upset/ 
unexplained jaundice, 44 
upper Gl symptoms with 
alarm features, 43 
characteristics of, 24-25 
in chest, 50-71 


chronic/episodic, 28-29 
referred, 25, 27 f 
somatic, 24 
true ‘colicky’, 24 
in upper/lower abdomen 
25/-26Z, 33, 34/ 
visceral, 24, 26/ 

Painless visible haematuria, 
158-159 

Palmar method, 247/ 

Palpable abdominal, nausea 
and vomiting, 228-229 
Palpable liver/suspected 
malignancy, 180 
Palpitation, 232-239, 236/ 
assessment of, 239 
rhythm of, 237 
symptoms of, 237 
Pancreatic cancer, 28 
Pancreatic pain, 28 
Paraproteinaemia, 137 
Parenchymal lung disease, 112 
Parkinsonism, features of, 221 
Parkinson’s disease 108 
weight loss and, 294 
Paroxysmal tachyarrhythmia, 
125 

Pattern recognition, 17 
PE. see Pulmonary embolism 
Pelvic mass, leg swelling and, 
191 

Pemphigoid, 242-243, 243 f, 
247 

Pemphigus, 242-243, 243/ 
Peptic ulcer disease, 28, 150, 
222 

Perianal disorders, 151 
Perianal sensation, 212 
Pericarditis, diagnostic features 
of, 62 

Peripheral nerve lesions limb 
weakness and, 196, 202 f 
Persistent fever, 1 45 
PFTs. see Pulmonary function 
tests 

Pharyngeal pouch, 108 
Phosphate (fasting), normal 
values of, 302f 
Photophobia, 250-251, 
255-256 

Phylloides tumours, 47 
Pityriasis rosea, 240, 242/, 249 
Placenta praevia, 288 
Pleural effusion, 1 19 f 
assessment of, 129 
Pleural transudate, 1 29b 
Pleuritic pain 
history of, 62 
overview, 66, 66/ 

Pneumonia, 51, 117/ 
haemoptysis and, 162 
right upper lobe, 118/ 
Pneumothorax, 51, 118, 118/ 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


313 • INDEX 


Polymyalgia rheumatica, 1 49 
Polypharmacy, 218 
Polyps, 151 

Poor glycaemic control, 133 
Po tal hypertension, 176 
Positive cultures, for fever, 145 
Postcoital bleeding, 292 
Post-ictal weakness (Todd's 
paresis), 205 

Postmenopausal bleeding, 289, 
291-292 

Post-radiation myelopathy, 199 
Post-void residual, 285 
Potassium, normal values of 

302f 

Practical guide, 7-16 
Pregnancy 

ectopic, bleeding due to, 288 

fatigue and, 133 

nausea and vomiting. 223, 

225 

vaginal bleeding and, 291 
Pregnancy-related bleeding, 288 
Presyncope, 99, 234 
disorders causing, 96 
Pretibial myxoedema, 191 
Primary biliary cirrhosis, 177 
Primary headache disorders, 

173 

Primary sclerosing cholangitis, 

177 

Probability and risk, 3-4 
Prosthetic joint, 187 
Protein (total), normal values 

of, 3027 

Proximal muscle weakness, 203 
Pruritus, 77 

Pseudobulbar palsy, 108, 1097 
Pseudoseizure, 270-271 
Pseudosyncope, 270-271 
Psoriasis, 240 

Psychogenic dyspnoea, 125b 
Pulmonary congestion, 194 
Pulmonary embolism (PE), 51, 

265, 268f 

assessment of suspected, 

1207 

clinical suspicion of, 119, 

1197, 165 

ECG in, 54b-58b, 597 
haemoptysis and, 1 62 
Wells score, 1207, 120f 
Pulmonary functon tests (PFTs), 
118, 127f 

abnormal, in chronic 
dyspnoea, 126-127 
Pulmonary hypertension, chronic 
dyspnoea and, 127 
Pulmonary oedema, 267 
haemoptysis and, 1 62 
PUO. see Pyrexia of unknown 
origin 

Purpura, 244, 248 


Pustular psoriasis, 240 241 7 
Pustules, 248-249 
Pyrexia, 138, 212 
Pyrexia of unknown origin 
(PUO), 138 

assessment of, 148-149, 
148b 

Q 

qSOFA score, 141, 141b 

R 

Radiation proctocolitis, 151 
Radicular pain, 208, 213 
Radioisotope bone scan, 148 
Rapid assessment, 7 
Rapidly progressive paraparesis, 
199 

Rash, 240-249 
assessment of, 2467 
drugs that cause, 245b 
Reactive arthritis, 184-185 
Rectal bleeding, 150-157 
acute, 156 

angiodysplasia (arteriovenous 
malformation) and, 151 
clinical features of, 157 
colorectal carcinoma and, 

151 

diverticular disease and, 151 
high-risk, 157, 157b 
inflammatory bowel disease 
and, 151 

ischaemic colitis and, 151 
overview of, 156, 1567 
perianal disorders and, 151 
resuscitation in, 156 
risk factor for, 157, 157b 
upper Gl source of, 156-157 
Recurrent fever, 145 
Red boxes, 207, 21 
Red cell fragments, 137 
Red eye, 250-256, 2517 
benign cause of, 256b 
bilateral, 255 
examination of, 2547 
extraocular causes for, 256b 
larger pupil in, 255 
localized, 256 
severe pain in, 256 
Red flag features, 1 72b 
Referred pain, 25, 277 
Reflex presyncope (vasovagal 
episode), 96 
Reflex syncope, 270 
Renal anaemia, 231 
Renal colic, haematuria and, 

161 

Renal disease, haematuria and, 

159 

Renal failure 
fatigue and, 133 
leg swelling and, 190 


nausea and vomiting and, 

229 

Renal impairment, 194 
Renal tract disorders, 29 
Respiratory failure, 75 
Respiratory tract infection (RTI) 
assessment of, 123 
classify type of 123 
evidence of, 115 
features of, 1 23 , 1 65 
gather information to inform 
antimicrobial choice, 1 23 
haemoptysis and, 162 
predisposing factors of, 1 23 
severity of, 1 23 
Resuscitation 

in acute haemorrhage, 153b 
in haematemesis, 1 53, 153b 
in rectal bleeding, 156 
Returning travellers, fever and. 

139 

Reversibility, 1277 
Rhabdomyolysis, 231,2317 
Rheumatic fever, Jones criteria 
for, 148b 

Right heart failure, 190 
Right upper lobe collapse, 1637 
Rockall risk score, 154, 1557 
Romberg’s test, 215b, 220 
RTI. see Respiratory tract 
infection 

S 

SAH. see Subarachnoid 
haemorrhage 
Saliva, inadequate, 108 
San Francisco Syncope Rule, 

279 

Schatzki rings, 108-109 
Schistosoma haematobium 
infection, 158-159 
Sciatica, lumbar disc herniation 
and, 208 

Scleritis, 252, 2537 
Scleroderma, 109 
Scrotal kin, abnormalities of, 

260 

Scrotal swelling, 258-263 
assessment of, 2617-2627, 
262 

common causes of, 2597 
inflammation in, 263 
painful, 263 
palpable, 263 
Scrotal wall oedema, 260 
Scrotum, examination of, 261b 
Seizures, 75, 205, 270-281 
assessment of, 2767, 2787 
factors of, 277 
features of, 273 274, 275b 
functional cause of, 274 
inpatient investigation for, 279 
neuroimaging in, 277b 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


314 • INDEX 


Seizures (Continued) 
pathology of, 276-277 
recurrent, 276 
trigger factors for, 271b 
Self-diagnosis, 6 
Sensory impairment, 87, 219 
Sepsis, 138, 265 
Septic arthritis, 184 
Septic screen, 142b-143b 
in specific patient groups, 

146b-147b 

Serum albumin, oedema and, 

194-195 

Sexually transmitted infections, 
haematuria and, 158 
Shock, 31,264-269 
adrenal insufficiency and, 269 
assessment, 266/j 267-269 
bleeding in, 267 
cardiac failure and, 267 
clinical features of, 267, 267fa 
diarrhoea and, 92 
immediate treatment of, 267 
infection and, 269 
intra-abdominal pathology, 
269 

physiology, 268f 
rapidly reversible causes of, 

268f 

‘Shock liver.’ see Ischaemic 
hepatitis 

Simple airway manoeuvres, 1 0f 
Sinus tachycardia, 232 
assessment of, 239 
causes of, 233b 
Sinusitis, headache and, 167 
Skin disease, 240 
Skin dysfunction, 247b 
Skin lesions, 47 
SOCRATES (Site, Onset, 
Character, Radiation, 
Associated features, Timing, 
Exacerbating factors and 
Severity of the pain, 24 
Sodium, normal values of, 302f 
Solitary lung mass, 163f 
Somatic pain, 24 
Space-occupying lesions, limb 
weakness and, 196 
Speech/language therapy, 
investigation/referral to, 110/ 7 , 
111 

Spermatic cord abnormalities, 

260 

Spherocytes, 137 
Sphincter dysfunction, 212 
Spinal cancer, red flags for 
possible, 209b 
Spinal cord lesions, limb 
weakness and, 196 
Spinal imaging, 213 
Spinal infections, 209, 209b 
Spinal tumour, 208 


Spirometry, 127f 
Spondyloarthritides, 208 
examination of, 21 Of 
Spondylolisthesis, 209 
Spontaneous intracerebral 
haemorrhage, 166 
Spontaneous intraventricular 
haemorrhage, 166 
ST elevation myocardial 
infarction (STEMI), ECG in, 
51b, 54b-58b, 54f-56f, 61, 
61b 

Stable angina, 52 
Staphylococcus aureus , 
gastroenteritis caused by, 222 
Status epilepticus, 276 
Steatorrhoea, 95 
Stenosis, lumbar spine, 208 
examination, 21 Of 211b 
movements of, 211 f 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, 
240-242, 248f 

Still’s disease adult-onset, 149 
Stones, haematuria and, 158 
Stress incontinence, 282 
Stretch test 
femoral nerve, 212f 
sciatic nerve roots, 21 If 
Stroke, 108 

Bamford classification of, 

207, 207 b 

limb weakness and, 1 96, 207 
Stroke volume, 232 
Structural cardiac disease, 96 
Structural heart disease, 195 
Subarachnoid haemorrhage 
(SAH), 166 

Subconjunctival haemorrhage, 

251,252f 

Subcutaneous lesions, 47 
Sub-erythrodermic, 240 
‘Sudden onset' headache, 172 
Superficial thrombophlebitis, 

193 

Supraventricular tachycardia 
(SVT), 232, 233f 
assessment of, 239 
SVT. see Supraventricular 
tachycardia 

Swallowing, difficulty, 110, 

110f 
Swelling 
leg, 190-195 
acute onset, 193 
overview of, 192, 192f 
Wells score, 193, 193f 
scrotal, 258-263 
assessment of, 261f-262f, 
262 

common causes of, 259f 
inflammation in, 263 
painful, 263 
palpable, 263 


Symptoms and disease, 5b, 5f 
Synacthen test, 269 
Syncope, 270-281 
arrhythmia-related, 280-281 
assessment of, 276f, 

278f 

features, 274, 275b 
functional cause of, 274 
inpatient investigation for, 279 
occult bleeding in, 279 
with postural hypotension, 

281 

precipitant of, 281 
shock and, 273 

Syndrome of inappropriate ADH 
secretion (SIADH), causes 
of, 89b 

Systemic inflammatory 
response, abdominal pain 
and, 25, 25 b 

Systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome, 265 

T 

Tachyarrhythmia, 268f 
paroxysmal, 125 
Tailored diagnostic guides, 
18-19 

Telemetry, 237 
Temporal arteritis (giant cell 
arteritis), and headache, 167, 
172, 172b 

TEN. see Toxic epidermal 
necrolysis 

Tendinopathies, 184 
Tendon reflexes, in myasthenia 
gravis, 202 

Tension headache, 167 
Tension pneumothorax, 
264-265, 268f 
Testicular abnormalities, 

258-260 

Testicular tumour, 258, 259f 
Thromboembolic risk factor, 

238 t 

Thrombolysis, contraindications 

to, 207b 

Thyrotoxicosis, weight loss and, 
294, 297 

TIA. see Transient ischaemic 
attack 

Tilt-table testing, 281 
Tissue hypoperfusion, 267 
T-LOC. see Transient loss of 
consciousness 

Todd’s paresis, see Post-ictal 
weakness 

Torsades de pointes, 235f 
Torsion of the testis, 258-260 
Toxic epidermal necrolysis 
(TEN), 240-242, 242f 
Toxins, 72 

Trajectory of disease, 121 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


315 • INDEX 


Transient focal limb weakness, 
197 

Transient focal neurological 
deficit 99 

Transient ischaemic attack (TIA), 
271 

limb weakness and, 196, 

205f 

Transient loss of consciousness 
(T-LOC), 270-281 
assessment of, 2727 
atypical features in, 271b 
cardiac features for, 273 
273b 

complete recovery of, 273 
definite, 273 
episode of, 274 
Transverse myelitis, 199 
Trauma, joint swelling and, 184 
Travellers, returning, fever and, 
139 

Treatment, before diagnosis, 

5-6 

Trichiasis, 251 
Trifascicular block, 280f 
Triglycerides, normal values of, 

302f 

Troponin, elevation of, 62-63, 

63 b 

True ‘colicky’ pain, 24 
True haemoptysis, 164 
Tumours, haematuria and, 158 

U 

UC. see Ulcerative colitis 
Ulcerative colitis (UC), 91 
rectal bleeding and, 151 
Unilateral limb weakness, 199 
overview of, 204, 2047 
signs referable to, 206 
sudden onset of, 205 
upper motor neuron signs 
of, 206 

Unilateral loin/flank pain, 32-33 
Unilateral oedema, 190, 193, 
195 

Unstable angina/NSTEMI 
assessment of, 65 
ECG in, 54b-58b, 577-587 
Unsteadiness, 99 
disorders causes, 97 
overview, 106, 1067 
Unsteady with eyes open, 220 
Upper airway obstruction, 1 12 
Upper Gl malignancy, 150 
Urate, normal values of, 3027 
Urea, normal values of, 3027 
Urethritis, 188 
Urge incontinence, 282 
Urinalysis, 285 
for abdominal pain, 40 
Urinary incontinence, 282-286, 
286b 


acute illness in, 285 
aggravating factors of, 283b 
assessment of, 2847 
atrophic vaginitis in, 285 
on coughing/sneezing, 286 
medications aggravating, 

283b 

multifactorial, 286 
spinal pathology for, 285 
urge symptoms, 286 
urine leak in, 285 
Urinary tract cancer, risk factors 
for, 159b, 161 
Urinary tract infection (UTI), 
symptoms of, 285 
Urinary tuberculosis, 1 58-159 
Urticaria, 243-244, 2447 
UTI. see Urinary tract infection 

V 

VA. see Visual acuity 
Vaginal bleeding, 288-292 
assessment of, 2907 
examination of, 291b, 

2917 

in first trimester, 288 
pregnancy and, 291 
in second and third trimester, 

288 

shock in, 291 
Valve disorders, 264 
Varicocoele, 2597, 260 
Vasculitis, 244, 2447 
Venous blood, normal values for 
biochemical tests in, 3027 
Ventilation 

adequacy of, in acute 
dyspnoea, 115 
assessment of 116b 
Ventricular tachycardia (VT). 

234, 2357 
assessment of, 239 
Vertebral trauma and fracture, 
208 
Vertigo 

disorders causing, 96 
overview of, 100, 1007 
migraine and, 102 
red flaq features in, 101, 

101b 

step-by-step assessment, 
101-102, 101b 
Vestibular neuronitis, vertigo 
and, 96 

Viral conjunctivitis, 250 
Visceral pain, 24, 267 
Visible haematuria 158 
high-risk features of, 161 
Visual acuity (VA), 250 
Volume overload, 231 
Vomiting, see Nausea and 
vomiting 

VT. see Ventricular tachycardia 


W 

Weakness 
limb, 196-207 
bilateral, see Bilateral limb 
weakness 

motor neuron disease and, 
196-197 

peripheral nerve lesions 
and, 196 

space-occupying lesions 
and, 196 

spinal cord lesions and, 

196 

stroke and, 196 
transient ischaemic attack 
and, 196 

unilateral, 199, 204, 2047 
unsteadiness and, 97 
Weight loss, 294-298 
alcohol misuse and, 298 
assessment of, 296, 2967 
chronic disease and, 294 
cognitive impairment and, 298 
diabetes and, 299b 
drug causes of, 295b 
eating disorder and, 298 
endocrine disorders and, 294 
factors contributing to, 298 
hypercalcaemia in, 297 
hyperglycaemia in, 297 
infection and, 297-298 
low mood and, 294-295, 298 
malignancy in, 294, 297 
medication and, 294, 298 
neurological disorder and, 

294 

non-malignant Gl disease 
and, 294 

screening for, 297 
severe systemic illness and, 

298 

unintentional, 295 
Weil’s disease, see Icteric 
leptospirosis 
Wells score 

deep vein thrombosis, 193, 
1937 

pulmonary embolism, 1207, 
1207 

Wernicke’s encephalopathy, 84 
Wheals, 249 
Wilson’s disease, 176 
Wolff-Parkinson-White 
syndrome, 232, 2337 
Working diagnosis, 3 

X 

Xanthochromia, 4 
X-rays, for lumbar compression 
fractures, 212-213 

Y 

Yellow boxes, 19, 207 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 


This page intentionally left blank 


downloaded from www.medicalbr.com 



